favor treasures with a nautical theme; images of
The topaz dragon lair shown in map 5.14 is situated
the sun; and mirrors, which they use to gaze at
among the rocky cliffs and beaches of a rugged
their own reflections and to redirect sunlight into
coastline. The lair is set in a cavern complex near
their caves.
the top of the cliffs, 50 feet above the sandy beaches,
Topaz dragons like to keep their lairs well lit and
outcroppings, and islands below. It has the follow
can spend endless hours watching the play of light
ing features:
upon their treasures. They sometimes obsessively
Outcropping. A flat outcropping with sheer lime arrange their hoards by minute gradations in color
stone sides, mostly bare, offers a comfortable spot and set up mirrors around a hoard chamber to
where the dragon can bask in the sunlight and make the mass of treasure appear bigger. But what
watch the waves below. ever pride topaz dragons take in their hoard, they
Entry Tunnel. A long tunnel leads from the outcrop have little desire to show it off, so even those rare
ping to the heart of the lair. creatures who maintain cordial relationships with
Decorated Caverns. The walls of the lair are mostly a topaz dragon are unlikely to ever see the dragon's
still in their natural state but are hung with the treasures.
dragon's collection of nautical paintings, mirrors,
and sun-colored tapestries. Numerous gold TOPAZ DRAGON ART OBJECTS
and-glass hanging lanterns are suspended from d8 Object
the ceiling, giving the place a warm, cozy glow.
An ornate statue of a sea serpent that plays ocean
(The lanterns might be magical or maintained
sounds when its gemstone eyes are pressed
by minions.) The floors are covered with plush
2 A set of seven levered brass mirrors that can be ad
sand-colored carpets.
justed to direct light in different directions
Hoard Chamber. A small chamber in the upper left
corner of the map contains the dragon's hoard. 3 A stained glass window depicting a golden city
The area is decorated in a similar fashion to the whose buildings are decorated with statues of drag
main chamber, and its collected jewels and gold ons and other winged creatures
are painstakingly organized and tucked into
4 A gold scrying bowl that shows random, constantly
chests stacked on gold-chased shelves.
shifting views of the Elemental Chaos
Clifftop Path. A second exit from the cave allows
5 A 10-foot-tall statue of the dragon, carved out of a
the dragon quick access to the lair and leads to a
single massive yellow crystal (the dragon thinks it's
narrow path bordered on the right by a sheer SO
foot drop and on the left by a cliff wall just as steep flattering, except for the tail)
and devoid of hand-or footholds. The dragon has 6 A large, shallow dish filled with water on which
floats a set of delicate wooden ships; speaking
ASTILAB0R different command words creates waves and whirl
Like many greatwyrms, the topaz Astilabor is often pools in the bowl
mistakenly identified as a dragon god-in this case,
7 A large spherical gold chandelier that gives off
the god of greed. In many ways, she is an archetype for
all dragonkind, embodying the desire to acquire and sunlight and is surrounded by an intricate and inter
hoard wealth. Her desire is born not of greed, though, locking set of glass bands engraved in an unknown
but rather from her study of the Material Plane, its language
magic, and dragons' interconnection with both. Drag
8 A set of topaz-inlaid gold claw rings engraved with
ons on many worlds acknowledge Astilabor as they
establish new lairs to host their hoards, linking them to the names of bronze dragons the topaz dragon has
the magic of the surrounding region. killed
I$2 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
I ......I
=== PAGE 154 ===
WHITE DRAGONS
d6 Ideal
S Vengeance. Every scar upon my scales, every trea
sure beyond my reach, is a slight that must be an
I e-~o~ an animafod de-bate- ... jv<;t not swered. (Evil)
with a white- dva9'n. lmpo<;<;ible- and 6 Service. I used to live as a beast, before learning
what is possible when creatures put aside their
i91ovan'G all of the-M. The- aiv- mv<;t be
petty needs in service of a greater goal. (Lawful)
diffe-v-e-nt in the-iv- an:Aic-- lafifvde:-<;.
WHITE DRAGON SPELLCASTING
-fizban
Spell
Age Save DC Spells Known
Use the tables, map, and other information in this sec
Young 12 gust of wind
tion to craft unique encounters with white dragons.
Adult 14 gust of wind
CREATING A WHITE DRAGON Ancient 16 gust of wind, ice storm
Use the White Dragon Personality Traits and White
WHITE DRAGON ADVENTURES
Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal of dis
tinctive white dragon characters, and use the White The White Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
Dragon Spellcasting table to help select spells for a suggestions for stories and adventures involving
spellcasting dragon. white dragons.
WHITE DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS WHITE DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
d8 Trait d8 Adventure Hook
Talkative people are usually the most dangerous. I A white dragon has been starving out a fortified set
like to eat them first. tlement by decimating the local caribou herds.
2 I brood over past encounters with foes and some 2 The words of a ritual to propitiate a vengeful spirit
times mistake newcomers for my ancient enemies. are tattooed on the flesh of a frost giant druid
who is entombed in the ice of a white dragon's lair.
3 I can recall many tidbits of lore picked up over the
centuries but have no sense of their import. 3 Aarakocra have become a nuisance in the lowlands
ever since they were driven out of their mountain
4 I don't like the taste of warm blood and always rinse
aerie by the arrival of a white dragon.
my mouth out with snow after a fight.
4 An item stolen from a white dragon's hoard has
S Whenever I encounter a new type of creature, I try
been passed down to an adventurer as a family heir
to lure it back to my lair so I can add it to my collec
loom-and the dragon is coming to get it back.
tion of frozen trophies.
S After driving away a white dragon, a group of adven
6 I have named the wind that blows through my lair
turers discovered a mighty demon trapped in the
and speak to it often. It is my sole companion.
ice in the dragon's lair. Now the ice is melting and
7 I meet any challenge to my territory with aggres
the demon will soon awaken-so the dragon must
sion, even if I can't win outright.
be lured back.
8 I feel protective of smaller, weaker creatures that are
6 A white dragon has been raiding distant farmlands,
tormented by larger monsters.
procuring gifts of food for a mate with a taste for
unusual cuisine.
WHITE DRAGON IDEALS
7 A white dragon has been exacting vengeance on a
d6 Ideal
rival silver dragon by killing off the silver dragon's
Rapacity. When a creature has the misfortune of
Humanoid companions.
crossing my path, I ask myself two questions: Am I
8 A frost giant wants to subdue a white dragon, hop
hungry now? And if not, will I be hungry later? (Any)
ing to overthrow the current frost giant jarl with
2 Survival. This world is harsh and unforgiving, and
the dragon's aid. In exchange for assistance from
so am I. I do whatever it takes to survive. (Any)
adventurers, the giant promises peace between the
3 Dominance. I delight in making others tremble,
giant clan and nearby settlements.
knowing that I could kill them at any time. (Evil)
4 Isolation. All creatures are either prey or rivals.
What do you mean by "company?" (Any)
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 153
=== PAGE 155 ===
CONNECTED CREATURES ADULT WHITE DRAGON CONNECTIONS
Savage and territorial by nature, white dragons sel d8 Connected Creatures
dom set out to make alliances, though some come to
A pirate captain uses the pervasive fog near an
understand the utility of doing so as they age. More
adult white dragon's lair to elude capture and propi
often, white dragons encountered in the company
tiates the dragon with a share of the crew's booty.
of other creatures have been forced into an uneasy
accommodation or a resentful servitude because 2 A djinni has pledged to serve an adult white dragon
they lack the power to dominate those compan- for a year and a day in exchange for sparing the ge
ions outright. nie's previous master's life.
3 An arcanaloth has been trying to tease information
WHITE DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS
out of an adult white dragon, hoping the dragon can
d6 Connected Creatures lead it to a lost font of magical power.
A pair of ice mephits delight in chasing townsfolk 4 An adult white dragon, captured by devils decades
into a white dragon wyrmling's lair to be eaten. ago, now serves as a mount for an ice devil.
2 A brooding griffon found a dragon egg and cared 5 A beholder manipulates an adult white dragon into
for it along with her own brood. Though the white eliminating its enemies by inventing ways in which
dragon wyrmling ate the griffon's other hatch lings, these foes have supposedly offended the dragon.
the griffon treats the wyrmling as her offspring and
6 A storm giant and an adult white dragon are en
protects the creature fiercely.
gaged in a deadly game of cat-and-mouse, leaving a
3 A clan of warriors has adopted a white dragon trail of destruction behind them.
wyrmling as the clan's sacred guardian and brings
7 An adult white dragon periodically brings a mouth
the wyrmling captured foes as offerings. ful of gems to the ancient crystal dragon who raised
4 Yetis keep a white dragon wyrmling chained near them, and who is now too old and tired to seek out
the entrance of their lair to discourage scavengers. new mineral veins for sustenance.
5 A well-meaning druid is trying to rear a white 8 A clan of winged kobolds treat the air currents and
dragon wyrmling as a guardian of nature, training ice slides of an adult white dragon's lair as an obsta
the dragon to hunt only Monstrosities. But the cle course. The dragon enjoys devising increasingly
wyrmling keeps attacking other creatures. hazardous routes for the kobolds to tackle.
6 A band of ogres keeps a white dragon wyrmling
caged near their larder, as they have discovered that ANCIENT WHITE DRAGON CONNECTIONS
the dragon's cold breath keeps their meat fresh. d4 Connected Creatures
A death knight and an ancient white dragon swap
YOUNG WHITE DRACON CONNECTIONS
tales of old foes and unanswered grievances, nurs
d6 Connected Creatures ing the hunger for vengeance that sustains them.
A young white dragon and a young remorhaz are 2 An ancient white dragon makes intermittent as
vying for control of the same territory, and their al saults against a mated pair of adult silver dragons
tercations endanger the other creatures in the area. who lair nearby.
2 A young white dragon has gained control of an in 3 An ancient white dragon guards a lich's phylactery,
visible stalker and sends it out to steal treasure. keeping it sealed in a tomb of ice. The lich visits pe
3 A young white dragon allows a clan of deep gnomes riodically, bearing fabulous treasures as payment.
to mine the dragon's mountain home in exchange 4 A community of ores believe an ancient white
for a healthy portion of the gemstones they extract. dragon to be the reincarnation of a legendary
4 A frost giant hunter has raised a young white leader. They've been venerating the dragon so long
dragon since the dragon hatched, and the two are that the dragon now believes the story and speaks
now inseparable. proudly in Ore about the ores' triumphs.
5 A young white dragon is pestered by a flameskull
bound to guard a magic item the dragon recently
acquired.
6 A young white dragon has been stalking a herd of
mammoths for days, trying to pick off the herd's
newborn calves.
154 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
l --
I
=== PAGE 156 ===
WHITE DRAGON LAIRS ADDITIONAL LAIR ACTIONS
At your discretion, a legendary (adult or ancient)
A white dragon's lair is a place of freezing tempera
white dragon can use one or both of the following
tures and profound solitude. Forgotten mountain
additional lair actions while in its lair:
holds, inaccessible chasms, and frozen caverns bur
ied deep beneath glacial ice are typical of the places Blinding Sleet. Driving sleet falls in a 40-foot-high,
white dragons seek out to make their homes. 20-foot-radius cylinder centered on a point the
White dragons enjoy the mournful sound of the dragon can see within 120 feet of it. Each creature
wind and frequently choose lairs with long, winding in that area must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution
tunnels down which icy gusts can travel. They sel saving throw or be blinded until initiative count 20
dom work to improve their lairs, but when they do, on the next round.
it is often to channel wind currents to create effects Whirling Wind. A strong wind blows in a
the dragon finds pleasing. The labyrinthine tunnels 30-foot-radius sphere centered on the dragon (see
and the mirror-like icy surfaces in a white drag the Dungeon Master's Guide for rules on strong
on's lair confound would-be thieves and might foil wind). The dragon's flying is not affected by this
their escape. wind, which lasts until the next time the dragon
uses a lair action or until the dragon dies.
WHITE DRAGON LAIR FEATURES
The white dragon lair shown in map 5.15 is a natu
ral stone grotto set in a cliff side capped by a glacial
ice sheet. It has the following features:
Cave Entrance. The entrance is a cave that opens
into the cliff's rocky base. When the dragon goes
out hunting, a wall of ice blocks the cave's en
trance. But while in residence, the dragon leaves
the cave mouth open to let the lair "breathe."
Frozen Stream. The cave's interior is a twisting
stone tunnel carved out by a subterranean
stream, now frozen over by the dragon's pres
ence. The stream spills down in stages over
low, frozen cascades, creating an icy stairway.
Dining Hall. A small chamber adjoining the
stream just inside the cave's entrance is the
dragon's dining hall; it contains the horrid
remnants of recent meals.
Rocky Grotto. Past the topmost cascade is
the grotto floor, a rocky cavern dimly lit by
blue light filtering through the icy vault high
above. The largest of the dragon's frozen
trophies are scattered about the grotto.
Low Cavern. Beyond the grotto, the stream
leads to a low-ceilinged cavern the dragon
used as a sleeping place when smaller; it
might now serve as a home for the drag
on's minions.
Upper Cavern. High above the grotto floor is a
large cave where the dragon rests and stores
the bulk of the dragon's hoard. The cave
opens onto a narrow stone shelf that juts out
from the grotto's walls and nearly encircles
it. The shelf is stable but icy, and there is no
obvious means of reaching it except for fly
ing or scaling the sheer rock walls.
Icy Dome. Above the shelf is a frozen dome
riddled with icicles. The ice here is just thin
enough for the dragon to burst through to
the open air if a quick escape is necessary.
=== PAGE 157 ===
,.
WHITE DRAGON LAIR
MAP 5 15
Side view
;
II
c3
1 square= 10 feet "g
z
Si
t
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 158 ===
REGIONAL EFFECTS The greater part of a white dragon's hoard con
Any of these effects might appear in the area around sists of trophies taken from defeated foes. Although
a white dragon's lair, in addition to or instead of the these trophies include items such as mighty weap
effects described in the Monster Manual: ons or ornate regalia that are valuable treasures in
their own right, they can just as easily be worthless
Biting Chill. Extreme cold envelops the land within
junk. A white dragon hoards trophies not for their
6 miles of the dragon's lair (see the Dungeon
material value, but as testaments to the dragon's
Master's Guide for rules on extreme cold). If the
dominance. An ancient white dragon's lair is a literal
climate in the area already features extreme cold,
memory palace and a maze of rime-encrusted trea
the cold is numbing, giving creatures in the area
sures that recount the story of the dragon's many
without immunity or resistance to cold damage
victories.
disadvantage on Strength and Dexterity checks.
Mirror Ice. The icy surfaces in the dragon's lair re
WHITE DRAGON ART OBJECTS
flect light like mirrors, giving creatures in the lair
dl2 Object
other than the dragon disadvantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide. In addition, at each A war horn carved to resemble a dragon's head with
intersection or branching passage, any creature a wide-open maw, which the dragon calls "Little
other than the dragon has a 50 percent chance of Toot"
going in a different direction from the direction 2 A statue depicting an elf paladin with the face
it intends. turned upward; the body has been defaced by the
dragon's claws
WHITE DRAGON TREASURES
3 A mammoth tusk engraved with images depicting
White dragons favor gems and precious metals
the history of a nomadic tribe; the dragon uses the
that mirror the cold sparkle of ice. The floors of
tusk to mark the spot where it has buried its pile of
their lairs are often scattered with diamonds,
gold
moonstones, and quartz, as well as with silver and
platinum coins, creating the impression of a river 4 A giant-sized cloak decorated with silver braiding
of stars when light spills across it. Though white that the dragon uses as a nest lining for its egg
dragons still value gold and copper, they usually 5 A wooden throne heaped with furs; any visitors
bury such metals in pits filled with rock or snow to must sit on the throne while the dragon recounts
keep their yellow gleam from spoiling the look of
the grisly death of the seat's previous owner
their lair.
6 A huge wooden door carved and painted to depict
a monarch enthroned with sword and scepter; the
RIME
dragon occasionally raps the door with its knuckles,
Rime is a prisoner to her past. This now-ancient white
dragon was raised in captivity, bred as a mount for pauses, and then chortles, "Nobody home"
an ancient knightly order. Mithral plates were mag 7 A frost giant jarl's crown with broken horns; the
ically fused to her skull and breastbone, bearing an
dragon enjoys perching the crown on an icy stalag
enchantment binding her to the service of her rider.
mite and then knocking it off with its tail
And though that rider and their order have been dead
for centuries, the magic of the mithral plates still binds 8 The prow of a ship carved to look like a pouncing
Rime to the place of her rider's demise. Only in the lion; the dragon occasionally roars at the lion
winter, when her powers are at their peak, can she
9 A gilded shield emblazoned with the holy symbol
range out from the ruined citadel that has become her
lair to terrorize surrounding lands. of a forgotten god; the dragon enjoys flicking the
Rime's past experience makes her suspicious of all shield with a claw to hear the sound it makes
Humanoids, and she frequently vents her wrath on
10 A ceremonial anvil of dwarven make; gazing at the
them without provocation. However, she suffers the
presence of the cultists who have taken up residence anvil, the dragon fondly recounts, "Seven at one
in her lair, since they bring her food during the long blow!"
months when she cannot hunt. Rime also seeks a way
11 A long, embroidered linen tapestry showing the
to rid herself of her mithral shackles and will warily
history of an ancient realm's civil war; the dragon
engage in conversation with spellcasters who might
help her. Failing that, her plan is to continue to amass "reads" the tapestry when it has trouble sleeping.
treasure during her winter raids until she is powerful 12 A bell engraved with images of an angelic host, still
enough to break her bonds completely.
attached to its splintered belfry; the dragon tolls
the bell with its tail, growling the name of one of its
defeated foes with each ring
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 157
=== PAGE 159 ===
A RAMPAGING SLUE GREATWYRM THREATENS
A WORLD'S EX.ISTENCE, ANO BAHAMUT STANDS
ALONGSIDE THE WORLD'S GREATEST HEROES.
=== PAGE 160 ===
BESTIARY
CROSS THE WORLDS OF THE MATERIAL Amethyst dragons pay particular attention to in
Plane and beyond, draconic creatures trusions of the Far Realm into the Material Plane.
appear in myriad varieties. This chapter They loathe the corruption that accompanies such
introduces the family of gem dragons, intrusions into the world, making them fierce oppo
cousins to the chromatic and metallic nents of the Far Realm and any creatures warped
dragons presented in the Monster Manual. It also in by its touch. Strangely, though, they are intrigued
cludes additional creatures of the Dragon type and by and fond of flumphs. These Aberrations, which
creatures often associated with dragons or found in oppose the depredations of mind flayers and other
their lairs. wicked Aberrations, remind amethyst dragons that
These monsters are arranged in alphabetical allies can be found in the strangest places.
order. For guidance on how to use a creature's
stat block, consult the introduction of the Mon HOARDED ARCANA
ster Manual. In addition to material wealth, amethyst dragons
delight in collecting knowledge and magic dealing
AMETHYST DRAGONS
with the nature of the planes of existence, cosmic
Amethyst dragons, the mightiest of the gem drag forces, and distant worlds. They prize treasures
ons, study and psionically manipulate the funda drawn from different worlds of the Material Plane,
mental principles of the multiverse, from the force of especially magic items and artworks that highlight
gravity to the emanations of the Outer Planes. Their the unique nature of different worlds. Magic items
innate psionics give them a measure of control over that allow teleportation or travel between planes,
how physical laws affect them. They defy gravity spellbooks filled with similar magic, and treatises
with flight that doesn't rely solely upon their great examining the nature of the multiverse form the
wings, and gravitational force empowers both their centerpiece of an amethyst dragon's hoard.
devastating breath weapon and the exploding ame
AN AMETHYST DRAGON'S LAIR
thyst crystals they spit at their foes.
Amethyst dragons make their lairs in caves next
ROYAL PURPLE to or under secluded pools and lakes, preferring
When first hatched, an amethyst dragon has scales caverns with at least one entrance submerged un
of dull, opaque purple. As the dragon grows, their derwater. They prize locations with a combination
scales, horns, and wing membranes become more of open space, connecting tunnels, and dead ends to
vibrant and translucent. When the dragon is fully make the most of their natural and magical mobility,
mature, their scales resemble rich purple amethyst using flight and teleportation to navigate obstacles
crystals, refracting light to take on an inner glow. in their lairs.
Their pupils fade with age, making the eyes of an The challenge rating of a legendary amethyst
ancient dragon resemble glowing white or pale lav dragon increases by 1 when it's encountered
ender orbs. Crystalline horns reminiscent of ame in its lair.
thyst chunks hover behind their heads, held there by
LAIR ACTIONS
telekinetic force and shifting with their moods.
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the
COSMOLOGICAL STUDY dragon can take one of the following lair actions;
the dragon can't take the same lair action two
Many amethyst dragons are fascinated by the exis
rounds in a row:
tence of other worlds in the Material Plane, and es
pecially the way individual dragons manifest unique Beguiling Whisper. The dragon telepathically whis
echoes across those worlds. They also prize under pers to one creature within range of the dragon's
standing of the cosmic forces that emanate from the telepathy. The creature must succeed on a DC
Outer Planes, studying the opposing tides of good 15 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by the
and evil, chaos and order, so they can offer counsel dragon until initiative count 20 on the next round.
to those with the wisdom to accept it. A creature charmed in this way obeys to the best
of its ability any command the dragon issues that
isn't directly harmful to the creature.
