companion, who has been unjustly sentenced. cloud giant citadel, winning the continued right to
7 A gold dragon demands reparations from a city dwell there in repeated gambling games.
whose rulers sent adventurers to steal from the 5 A young gold dragon and an archmage are uneasy
dragon's hoard. companions, bound to defend each other by the dy
8 A gold dragon requires a team of specialists to help ing wish of a heroic warrior they both loved.
break into the infamous Lamentation Vault and ac 6 After a young gold dragon freed a djinni from
quire the world-shaking prophecy held within. servitude, the djinni installed a portal linking the
dragon's lair to the djinni's citadel on the Elemental
CONNECTED CREATURES
Plane of Air.
Gold dragons tend to hold themselves apart from
the worlds they watch over, favoring isolation and
ADULT GOLD DRAGON CONNECTIONS
trusting only a few close allies and guardians. When
d8 Connected Creatures
they do walk among other creatures, they prefer to
do so in disguise, relishing the opportunity to see An adult gold dragon has sworn to destroy the balor
the world through different eyes. who killed the dragon's mate.
2 An adult gold dragon feels responsible for a pal
GOLD DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS adin's fall from grace and sends minions across
d6 Connected Creatures the world in search of the paladin-now a death
A gold dragon wyrmling bonded with a xorn over knight-so they both might be redeemed.
their shared love of gems and seeks to help the 3 An adult green dragon and an adult gold dragon
creature back to the Elemental Plane of Earth. skirmish over control of the vine-choked ruins of a
2 A gold dragon wyrmling yearns to imitate a couatl floating mausoleum and its library oftalking skulls.
mentor and is searching for a magical location 4 An adult gold dragon enjoys playing strategy games
worth guarding. with an androsphinx, one of the few creatures able
3 A gold dragon wyrmling is venerated by a tribe of to successfully bluff the dragon.
lizardfolk-much to the consternation of the priest 5 An adult gold dragon living in a desert temple helps
who used to rule the tribe. some elf oracles interpret visions bestowed by an
4 A band of centaurs makes pilgrimages to a gold artifact called the Siren's Lens.
dragon wyrmling's lair, bringing gifts of gems and 6 An imprisoned mummy lord has convinced its adult
knowledge. gold dragon jailer that the mummy's plans for dom
5 A gold dragon wyrmling is fascinated by modrons' ination will be for the best in the long run.
clockwork determinism and has tracked down and 7 An adult gold dragon crafted an iron golem to de
befriended a rogue pentadrone. fend the dragon's lair and talks to it as if it were a
6 A gold dragon wyrmling has befriended a group of person.
githzerai monks and visits them regularly to con 8 An adult gold dragon hunts the adult blue dracolich
duct elaborate thought experiments. who stole the legendary Crown of Endings from the
gold dragon's hoard.
YOUNG GOLD DRAGON CONNECTIONS
d6 Connected Creatures ANCIENT GOLD DRAGON CONNECTIONS
A young gold dragon enjoys the company of treants, d4 Connected Creatures
who share the dragon's long view of history and A solar who admires an ancient gold dragon cam
methodical conversational style. paigns to recruit the dragon into the service of the
2 A young gold dragon lives in a cluster of stone solar's god.
spires and has secured the service of the galeb duhr 2 An ancient gold dragon is infatuated with an oblivi
who watch over the site. ous empyrean, drawn in by the empyrean's carefree
nature and larger-than-life emotions.
122 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 124 ===
..........
d4 Connected Creatures GOLD DRAGON LAIR FEATURES
The gold dragon lair shown in map 5.9 occupies a
3 An ancient gold dragon and a lich have vied to bend
misty river gorge and has the following features:
history to their respective wills. The two have reluc
tantly come to understand and empathize with each Waterfall Cave. A rushing river cascades over the
cliff in a scintillating waterfall, concealing the
other.
entrance to the dragon's cavern complex. Past
4 An ancient gold dragon takes little interest in the
this thundering curtain, a cave opens into the
day-to-day governance of a powerful empire. But
grand hall.
the dragon expects to beiobeyed completely when
Grand Hall. Six glowing crystalline columns sup
deigning to address the populace.
port the ceiling of this cave. The columns' colors
GOLD DRAGON LAIRS
TAMARAND
Despite their affection for people and their diverse As the King of justice, Tamarand is the nominal ruler of
cultures, gold dragons typically make their lairs in gold dragons throughout Faerun. Other gold dragons
hidden places far from civilization, where only the seek out his wisdom before embarking on their own
most desperate and dedicated can find them. Many quests, to ensure they aren't overlooking any hidden
consequences.
live in the ruins of vanished cultures, appreciating
Tamarand is thoughtful, decisive, and surprisingly
the beautiful inevitability of entropy and the re
friendly toward non-dragons. He has strong bonds
minder of how easily progress can be lost without
with the storm giants of the Galena Mountains and
careful tending. Crumbling shrines, towers re is a dedicated scholar of Humanoid cultures, having
claimed by the wilderness, and fallen fortresses all seen firsthand just how powerful such creatures can
appeal to a gold dragon's sense of history-though be when properly organized. After narrowly escaping
they can be equally enraptured by picturesque nat assassination by dragon hunters in his former lair
near Bloodstone Pass, Tamarand currently resides in
ural settings. A gold dragon lair almost always in
the Vaasan wilderness and keeps his exact location a
volves water, be it a river, a lake, or an ocean shore.
closely guarded secret.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 123
=== PAGE 125 ===
reflect the dragon's mood, and they can animate to Liar's Revelation. Within 6 miles of the dragon's
defend the lair. lair, any creature attempting to tell a deliberate lie
Gallery. A passageway running left from the grand must succeed on a DC 15 Charisma saving throw
hall is lined with busts of allies and enemies from or find itself accidentally revealing the truth it was
the dragon's past. This area contains the water attempting to conceal. The first time a creature
mirror, a magical glass case filled by seepage from fails this saving throw, it is immune to this effect
the river above, which the dragon uses to scry for 24 hours.
across both distance and time.
Sleeping Chamber. At the end of the gallery pas GOLD DRAGON TREASURES
sage, the dragon's sleeping chamber opens up, its Gold dragons consider gems and pearls culinary
walls lined with shelves holding books and useful delicacies, and they often have a section of their
magic items. hoard that's as much pantry as treasury. Beyond
Treasury Hall. Armored doors within the sleep such consumables, they prefer items they can learn
ing chamber lead to the dragon's treasury hall, from, whether rare historical or metaphysical texts,
which features an 80-foot sheer drop into a view mysterious relics and curios, or puzzles and prophe
ing gallery. cies offering hints at the future.
Hoard and Vault. A chamber on the right side of Gold dragons also collect trophies marking im
the treasury hall holds the dragon's hoard, which portant events and successes in their lives. But
serves to distract would-be thieves from a store unlike many other dragons, they are just as likely to
of dangerous and corrupting artifacts hidden in a prize mementos of their defeats and mistakes, be
secret vault opposite the hoard chamber. lieving that such reminders are inherently instruc
Pantry. A rough chamber off the right side of the tive. Like bronze dragons, gold dragons often guard
great hall acts as the dragon's pantry, holding particularly dangerous artifacts as a form of public
racks of pearls and other gems. service, and thus prize clever magical or mundane
Apartments. In the top right corner of the map, defenses to keep their lairs safe and hidden.
a worked-stone alcove leads to Humanoid-scale
apartments to accommodate the dragon's most GOLD DRAGON ART OBJECTS
honored comrades, as well as the dragon in Hu
dlO Object
manoid form.
A fine tapestry depicting the intermingled family
Pavilions. Outside the lair, weathered pavilions
trees of several royal bloodlines going back multiple
climb the cliffs overlooking the waterfall's plunge
generations-and containing surprising revelations
pool, offering a convenient place for the dragon
to meet visitors. Beyond the pavilions, an elegant 2 An orrery showing the world's place in the solar sys
pathway winds through self-manicuring gardens tem-with one gemstone planet too many
before ending abruptly in trackless wilderness. 3 A scroll covered with surrealist imagery, entitled
Voyage through the Land of Dreams
ADDITIONAL LAIR ACTION
At your discretion, a legendary (adult or ancient) 4 A black dragon skull with a crack down the middle
gold dragon can use the following additional lair ac and gems fixed in its eye sockets; a plaque along the
tion while in its lair: bottom reads, "So too shall ye be"
S A metal wheel with various holy symbols affixed to
Beguiling Glow. Warm light fills a 30-foot-radius
sphere centered on the dragon; each creature in its edges; thin arms at the center of the wheel are
that area must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom sav made to hold a spherical object that is missing
ing throw or be charmed by the dragon until initia 6 A series of nesting metal cylinders, each inscribed
tive count 20 on the next round. with a different proverb or paradox; the central cyl
inder contains a single gold dragon scale
REGIONAL EFFECTS
7 An elaborate atlas bound in wyvern hide, with sev
Any of these effects might appear in the area around
a gold dragon's lair, in addition to or instead of the eral remote regions circled and labeled in code
effects described in the Monster Manual: 8 A clever clockwork music box that, when cranked,
recites a prophecy in Modron
Beneficent Trail. Within 10 miles of the dragon's
lair, small runes in the shape of a gold dragon ap 9 An elaborately decorated tea set, each of its cups
pear to creatures in great need, marking a subtle themed after a different plane of existence
trail leading to the dragon's lair. 10 An elaborate calendar clock with one face burned
Emanation ofJ ustice. Creatures that spend a year and cracked and two others that are counting down
within 6 miles of the dragon's lair value fairness
to unspecified future events, including one less than
and justice over their personal feelings.
a month away
124 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 126 ===
GOLD DRAGON LAIR
MAP 5-9
..
ti
.
,
""·
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 125
=== PAGE 127 ===
GREEN DRAGONS
d6 Ideal
3 Respect. Fear is amusing, but reverence is deli
cious. (Any)
In ~oMe- wa~~ fhe- sre-e-n dvagn i~ fhe 4 Intrigue. The world is so much more entertaining
Mo~t '~vagn>' of dvagn~. PiiiJ fhat when no one trusts anyone. (Evil)
S Imagination. Nothing is more gauche than repeat
Tiamat ~t~ c..-ve-dit fov fhe-M.
ing the same activities day after day. (Any)
-Pizban 6 Tolerance. The impermanence of intelligent life is
bittersweet and should be honored as such. (Good)
l
Use the tables, map, and other information in
GREEN DRAGON SPELLCASTING
this section to craft unique encounters with
Spell
green dragons.
]) Age Save DC Spells Known
CREATING A GREEN DRAGON Young 13 invisibility, speak with animals
Use the Green Dragon Personality Traits and Green Adult 16 invisibility, plant growth, speak with
Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal of dis animals
tinctive green dragon characters, and use the Green Ancient 19 invisibility, mass suggestion, plant
Dragon Spellcasting table to help select spells for a growth, speak with animals
spellcasting dragon.
GREEN DRAGON ADVENTURES
GREEN DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS
The Green Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
d8 Trait suggestions for stories and adventures involving
You're either with me or you're against me. Just kid green dragons.
ding-you're lunch either way!
2 I hate how much people think they matter in a GREEN DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
world that was old before their kind even learned d8 Adventure Hook
the idea of names. A green dragon is terrorizing a forest settlement,
3 The more the merrier as far as I'm concerned: more murdering and eating someone each night before
to control, more to torture, more to feast upon depositing the grisly remains in the village square.
when I'm finally bored. 2 Trolls are attacking trade caravans, stealing and
4 Bipedal life is too ugly and ignorant to merit even a killing whatever they can-all to placate a green
scrap of compassion. dragon living in their territory.
S I like seeing life through the eyes of a lesser being 3 A cult is capturing travelers to feed a newly hatched
before forcing that creature to gouge their eyes out. pair of green dragons.
6 The wilds are mine and mine alone, and anyone 4 A convicted murderer begs for clemency, claiming
who thinks they can enter my territory had best to have been under the control of a green dragon
hope I have other distractions that day. while on a killing spree.
7 I allow others to dwell in my forest-if they act as S The misty forest at the border of a coastal realm is
my eyes, ears, and occasional playthings in return. beginning to grow alarmingly, and sages suspect it
might be the work of a green dragon.
8 I harbor no animosity toward anyone. Let me grow
ancient with my forest, and I'll leave you in peace. 6 A green dragon stirs from a long underground
slumber to discover that a city has been built where
GREEN DRAGON IDEALS the dragon's forest lair once stood.
d6 Ideal 7 Hill giant raiders promise to stop their pillaging in
Isolation. Territories can be properly established exchange for a clutch of green dragon wyrmlings to
only when all parties respect the borders of their raise.
neighbors. (Lawful) 8 A green dragon stalks a well-known trade route, in
2 Control. All lesser beings should bare their throats terrogating all passersby on what they know about a
to their betters. (Evil) dead gold dragon's lost hoard.
126 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
J '
=== PAGE 128 ===
CONNECTED CREATURES ADULT GREEN DRAGON CONNECTIONS
Green dragons see other living beings as objects to
d8 Connected Creatures
subjugate, torment, or eat. Solitary by nature, they
A ruler controlled by an adult green dragon plun
seldom tolerate the presence of other creatures un
ders the realm's populace to fill the dragon's hoard.
less their presence serves a purpose.
2 Several adult green dragons fight to claim a treasure
GREEN DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS hoard hidden under a woodland city.
d6 Connected Creatures 3 An adult green dragon is bound to the service of a
guardian naga and baits other creatures to kill the
A green dragon wyrmling is the centerpiece of a
dragon's naga captor.
traveling circus but might not be a prisoner after all.
4 Giant apes raised from birth by an adult green
2 A green dragon wyrmling was raised by a cluster of
dragon now serve as the dragon's hunting party.
pseudodragons, whom the wyrmling now protects.
5 Mind-controlled clerics lead unsuspecting worship
3 Hobgoblin raiders have captured several green
ers to the lair of an adult green dragon.
dragon wyrmlings, hoping to use them as the van
guards of their war parties. 6 An adult green dragon works to corrupt a young
gold dragon trapped in the green dragon's woods.
4 A green dragon wyrmling exacerbates the chaotic
tendencies of a group of satyrs, driving them to 7 Wood elves flagellate themselves to earn the favor
greater acts of mischief with the promise of rich of a god suddenly turned cruel, not knowing they've
rewards. been misled by an adult green dragon.
5 A green dragon wyrmling tricks a village of lizard 8 An adult green dragon turns treants against the dru
folk into believing the dragon is an incarnation of a ids who once guarded the treants' grove.
lizardfolk god.
ANCIENT GREEN DRAGON CONNECTIONS
6 An ancient couatl attempts to shape the moral
outlook of a green dragon wyrmling, so the dragon d4 Connected Creatures
might inherit the duty of guarding the couatl's trea An ancient green dragon returns to the same sylvan
sures. forest every year to feed upon a herd of unicorns.
2 An ancient green dragon prevents would-be res
YOUNG GREEN DRAGON CONNECTIONS cuers from reaching a cursed realm whose people
d6 Connected Creatures are magically asleep and hidden behind a forest of
A young green dragon and a treant vie for influence thorns.
over a woodland region. 3 A once-peaceful land has become warlike, thanks
2 A young green dragon forces a group of dryads to to the ancient green dragon controlling its elf mon
collect treasures for the dragon's hoard, threatening archs.
to destroy their trees if they refuse. 4 An ancient green dragon is the guardian of a lich's
3 An infestation of twig blights has taken over the lair phylactery and extorts favors from the lich.
of a young green dragon, and the dragon will do
GREEN DRAGON LAIRS
anything to reclaim it.
Green dragons prefer making their lairs in verdant
4 Green hags compete to gain an alliance with a
places-jungles, bayous, pine forests, or anywhere
young green dragon, turning a village into a staging
with abundant vegetation that they can shape ac
ground for their games of deceit.
cording to their desires. An older green dragon
5 A young green dragon directs a conclave of yuan-ti
might indulge in horticulture, cultivating the local
under the command of a yuan-ti abomination, or
flora as befits their individual aesthetic. However,
dering the serpentfolk to search the forgotten tun most green dragons are content to either excavate
nels of a city for the ancient treasures buried there. beneath trees and nestle among the roots or make
6 An oni and a young green dragon work together to lairs inside trees large enough to be hollowed out
terrorize a village, taking a victim every night and without compromising their structure.
Green dragons take great interest in woodland
leaving the rest too frightened to flee.
settlements when seeking lair sites. Though they
are fully capable of modifying forests to their own
liking, they find it easier and vastly more entertain
ing to take something belonging to smaller and
weaker beings.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 127
=== PAGE 129 ===
..
GREEN DRAGON LAIR
Side view
0
,r Underground
•
1 square = 10 feet
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 130 ===
GREEN DRAGON LAIR FEATURES Lashing Root. One large root or branch that is part
The green dragon lair shown in map 5.10 was an of the lair makes a melee attack roll against a
enormous banyan tree once sacred to the wood creature within 10 feet of it. It has a +7 bonus to
elves who lived around it. The original host tree hit and deals 10 (3d6) bludgeoning damage on a
around which the banyan tree grew is now dead hit. If the target is a Medium or smaller creature,
and has rotted away, leaving a large columnar shaft it must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw
within the trunk of the banyan that the dragon has or be knocked prone.
expanded into a subterranean lair. The banyan con
REGIONAL EFFECTS
tinues to grow and to swallow up other nearby trees.
Either or both of these effects might appear in the
The lair has the following features:
area around a green dragon's lair, in addition to or
Canopy. The green dragon has teased the ban instead of those described in the Monster Manual:
yan's sprawling canopy into a bowl-like shape
Inviting Whispers. Whispers rustle in the foliage
within which the dragon can comfortably lounge.
within 1 mile of the dragon's lair. The words are
Threaded through the branches are bones from
indistinct, but a creature with an Intelligence
the dragon's meals-some messily clustered
score of 5 or higher interprets them as an invita
among the leaves, and others deliberately ar
tion to move deeper into the greenery.
ranged to create macabre dioramas for the drag
Twisted Messengers. The dragon can cause any
on's amusement. Such grisly scenes can also be
Tiny Beast within 1 mile of its lair to act as its
seen scattered throughout the lair as reminders of
mouthpiece. The effect is horrendous, as the crea
the dragon's power, and as distractions and warn
ture's throat and mouth temporarily warp into a
ings for would-be interlopers.
twisted version of the dragon's own in order to
Underground. The hollow center of the tree gives
allow the dragon's voice to issue forth.
access to the dragon's lair below, nestled among
the banyan's sprawling roots. Three tunnels
GREEN DRAGON TREASURES
branch off from the vertical shaft at different lev
els- none of them at the very bottom. This means Green dragons relish gems and jewelry whose pal
a creature that falls to the bottom must find a way ettes reflect their chosen forest environments, favor
to ascend at least as far as the lowest tunnel. ing viridescent colors and bursts of floral brilliance.
Hoard Chamber. All three passages eventually con Many develop vast collections of emeralds and
verge in the large chamber at the right side of the beryls as a result, punctuated by amber, red rubies,
map, where most of the dragon's hoard is kept. tiger's eyes, bismuth, and the like. They likewise
covet finely crafted items and works of art depicting
ADDITIONAL LAIR ACTIONS unspoiled nature.
At your discretion, a legendary (adult or ancient)
green dragon can use one or both of the following
additional lair actions while in its lair:
Creeper Vines. The dragon can use the vines and
roots within its lair to animate up to three Human
oid corpses, which become zombies (see their
entry in the Monster Manual). The zom
bies take their turn immediately after
this lair action. Each one reverts
to an inanimate corpse after
1 minute, when the dragon
uses this lair action again,
or when the zombie is
destroyed.
=== PAGE 131 ===
Unlike many of their kin, green dragons use the MOONSTONE DRAGONS
transformative power of nature to turn those valu
ables into truly unique treasures. By wrapping and
threading treasures with rare vegetation and care
Otie- c.-at1 imajtie- the- Mo~t pve-po~fe-vov~
fully applying their own skill as gardeners, green
dragons meld nature and artifice into new master thi~ avovtid a moot1~fot1e- dvagt1 ... atid
pieces. This can lead to complications for would-be
the-ti look- avovtid atid ve-aliz.e- otie- wa~ tiot
treasure hunters, as green dragons take enormous
pride in their handiwork-so much so that intrud it1 fae,,.f imajtii~
ers damaging the delicate arrangements of flower
-Przbat1
and vine that surround a treasure cache might
come under attack before even touching any of the
hoard's contents. Use the tables and other information in this section
to craft unique encounters with moonstone dragons.
GREEN DRAC0N ART OBJECTS Moonstone dragon stat blocks appear in chapter 6.
dlO Object
CREATING A MOONSTONE DRAGON
The polished skull of a unicorn, latticed with lumi•
nescent blooms Use the Moonstone Dragon Personality Traits and
Moonstone Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your por
2 An elaborate necklace of yuan-ti origin, set with
trayal of distinctive moonstone dragon characters.
gleaming gems and dripping with strands of pearls
3 A harp, its pillar carved to resemble a beautiful elf
MOONSTONE DRACON PERSONALITY TRAITS
who weeps loudly and inconsolably
d8 Trait
4 A marble statue that once showed a knight van
I often lose track of whether I'm in the Feywild or
quishing a dragon, but due to strategic damage,
on the Material Plane.
now looks like a knight tumbling into massive jaws
2 I have been known to throw caution to the wind
S The baby teeth of a Humanoid, preserved in amber
when in pursuit of new items for my hoard.
furred with a golden fungus that smells like ginger
3 No matter how old I get, I always delight in harm
bread
less pranks and tricks.
6 A giant-sized hunting horn scrimshawed with elabo
4 I've always been mature for my age, and I can't wait
rate patterns, the pewter only slightly tarnished
for the day I can retire to my lair to be taken care of
7 A stained glass window still set within a fragment of
by doting fey.
wall depicting the many deaths of an elf monarch
S I look down upon any being who resorts to violence
8 A triptych of silver mirrors, set in an ornate bram•
to solve a problem.
bled iron frame sculpted to depict figures in a gro
6 Conversing with others is often difficult because
tesque bacchanal
I'm so easily distr ... oh my goodness, is that circlet
9 Quartz terrariums carried on the backs of tourma
made of silver?
line jaguars, overgrown with misshapen cacti
7 I find the waking world tedious and mundane and
10 A string of skulls riddled with too many eye sockets,
would much rather spend my time asleep, in the
their jaws replaced by carved gemstones
realm of dreams.
8 I find the whimsy offey, and whimsy in general, to
CYAN BL00DBANE
be exasperating and exhausting.
K'rshinthintl-commonly known as Cyan Bloodbane
is a deeply cunning ancient green dragon with an
exacting sense of malice. He is a charismatic creature, MOONSTONE DRACON IDEALS
but flattery is only one of his many weapons.
d6 Ideal
During the War of the Lance on the world of Krynn,
Curiosity. I might never be able to experience every
Cyan Bloodbane used one of the Orbs ofDragonkind
to poison the mind of the elf king Lorac, causing the thing in the multiverse-but it doesn't hurt to try.
land of Silvanesti to become swallowed up in Lorac's (Any)
nightmares. The green dragon has no particular loyalty
2 Nonviolence. Violence need never be the answer in
to Tiamat or dedication to her cause; his actions are in
...., . his own best interests . a multiverse of infinite possibilities. {Neutral)
130 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 132 ===
d6 Ideal MOONSTONE DRAGON WYRMLING
3 Whimsy. Why waste time on boring, ordinary con CONNECTIONS
cerns when the world is filled with fantastic and d6 Connected Creatures
ludicrous wonders? (Chaotic) An abandoned moonstone dragon wyrmling is be
4 Beauty. There is beauty to be found in even the sim ing raised by a family of faerie dragons, who eagerly
plest things if you look hard enough. (Good) encourage the wyrmling's mischievous habits.
5 Inspiration. Great are history's artists and creators. 2 A moonstone dragon wyrmling searches for who
But greater still are those who inspire them. (Any) ever made the dragon's friend-a suit of animated
armor able to make witty, iflimited, conversation.
6 Power. Creatures are at their most vulnerable in
their dreams, and I am the master of dreams. (Evil) 3 A moonstone dragon wyrmling has convinced a
lost white dragon wyrmling that the latter is also
MOONSTONE DRAGON ADVENTURES a moonstone dragon, cursed by an archfey of win
The Moonstone Dragon Adventure Hooks table of ter. The two travel together, causing trouble in the
fers suggestions for stories and adventures involving name of lifting the "curse."
moonstone dragons. 4 Ettercaps captured a moonstone dragon wyrmling,
who has so far avoided becoming dinner by teach
MOONSTONE DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
ing the ettercaps to create wild, impossible sculp
d8 Adventure Hook tures with their webs.
A wealthy and well-known artist's muse-a moon 5 A moonstone dragon wyrmling torments a group
stone dragon-has stopped appearing in their of lost modrons by tricking them into performing
dreams. The artist is desperate to hire adventurers chaotic acts.
to find the dragon.
6 A moonstone dragon wyrmling has volunteered to
2 A clutch of moonstone dragons has discovered a be a spy in a conflict between a group of pixies and
portal to the Material Plane and is wreaking havoc a group of quicklings. Both sides believe the wyrm
on nearby villages, pilfering every bit of silver the ling is working exclusively for them.
locals own.
3 A moonstone dragon seeks the platinum crown of a YOUNG MOONSTONE DRAGON CONNECTIONS
Fey prince-and will do anything to get it. d6 Connected Creatures
4 A gluttonous moonstone dragon is consuming all A young moonstone dragon on the cusp of adult
the moonlight in a small forest, making the dark hood refuses to settle down and build a lair. To pro
ened path through the woods ideal for banditry. tect the local populace from the dragon's chaotic
5 A moonstone dragon hosts a storytelling competi activities, a minor deity sends a deva to temper the
tion in the Feywild, and the winner gets to claim any dragon's mischievous spirit.
one item on display in the dragon's lair. 2 A young moonstone dragon fell victim to a fomo
6 A moonstone dragon, offended by gifts of gold, is rian's curse and has elected to stay with the Giant
causing nightmares among the local nobility. rather than reveal this magical affliction.
7 A powerful spellcaster is forcing a captive moon 3 A treant and a young moonstone dragon love to
stone dragon to invade the dreams of adventurers, meet and share stories. While the dragon speaks of
sending parties on quests to assist the spellcaster's travels and adventures, the treant tells tales of the
nefarious schemes. tiny moments that make up a forest's life.
8 A moonstone dragon that accidentally stumbled 4 A young moonstone dragon has acquired a power
through a portal to the Material Plane can't find a ful magic item belonging to one of the fey courts
way back home to the Feywild. and is leading the assassin sent to retrieve the item
on a chase through the Feywild.
CONNECTED CREATURES
5 A young moonstone dragon has joined a pack of
In the Feywild, moonstone dragons interact mostly
blink dogs for a year and a day. The dragon pre
with pixies, sprites, and other Fey creatures who re
tends to be a blink dog and refuses to admit other
vere and serve the dragon. Outside the Feywild, they
wise until this time with the pack expires.
often prefer to communicate with other creatures
through dreams. 6 A young moonstone dragon and a night hag repeat
edly encounter each other in the dream realm, but
they have never met in the flesh.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 131
=== PAGE 133 ===
ADULT MOONSTONE DRAGON CONNECTIONS cations in the Feywild as their primary residences,
locations on the Material Plane for entertaining
d8 Connected Creatures
guests, and locations on the Ethereal Plane for stor
A Fey noble has sent an archmage advisor to parley
age. Occasionally, though, a whimsical moonstone
with an adult moonstone dragon whose lair is in the
dragon delights in shaking things up, insisting that
noble's territory, and it isn't going well. visitors come to the Border Ethereal for a meeting
2 Fascinated by the dreams of a myconid sovereign, or sleeping in the middle of a heavily trafficked for
an adult moonstone dragon has befriended the est on the Material Plane.
whole myconid colony. Moonstone dragons navigate their multiplanar
lairs by opening portals between planes at will.
3 In the midst of a werewolf invasion, someone
They sometimes forget to close those portals,
suggests that a nearby adult moonstone dragon's
allowing the inhabitants of one plane to wander
hoard could be a good source of silver.
into others.
4 An adult moonstone dragon's burgeoning hoard
attracts the attention of an arcanaloth seeking a MOONSTONE DRAGON LAIR FEATURES
powerful Feywild artifact. You can look to other maps in this chapter as in
spiration for the scattered parts of a moonstone
5 An adult moonstone dragon attempts to help a be
dragon's lair. For example, a well maintained and
holder worried that its dreams will soon give birth
above-water version of the black dragon lair's tower
to a rival beholder.
(map 5.2) makes a great Feywild audience chamber,
6 Members of a night hag coven are determined to while a vibrant, living version of the green dragon
prevent an adult moonstone dragon from contact lair's enormous tree (map 5.10) makes for a very
ing creatures in the dream realm, and the dragon comfortable bedchamber in a grove on the Material
has no idea why. Plane. And features such as the cloud bridges of
7 An adult moonstone dragon is called upon to disci the silver dragon lair (map 5.13) can be used for the
parts of a moonstone dragon's lair that lie in the
pline a group of moonstone dragon wyrmlings that
Border Ethereal.
rampaged through a Fey noble's territory.
8 An adult moonstone dragon has amassed a menag MOONSTONE DRAGON TREASURES
erie off igurines of wondrous power and activates the
Moonstone dragons prefer silver, platinum, and mi
items regularly to liven up the lair.
thral to copper and gold, and white or silvery gems
to more colorful ones. Some are simply uninterested
ANCIENT MOONSTONE DRAGON
in treasures made of what they consider inferior
CONNECTIONS metals, but others actively dislike copper and gold
d4 Connected Creatures creations and consider them aesthetically offen-
An ancient moonstone dragon and an ancient green sive. People who mistakenly offer these metals to
the wrong moonstone dragon sometimes wake to
dragon vie for supremacy in a primeval forest.
find all their silver-and memory of the past few
2 An ancient moonstone dragon has partnered with
days-missing.
an androsphinx to guard a precious treasure, taking
In addition to their strong preference for certain
the place of the sphinx's slain gynosphinx partner.
metals, many moonstone dragons seek out artworks
3 An ancient moonstone dragon is summoned to me and relics with unique, whimsical, or absurd de
diate a centuries-old conflict between fey courts. signs. The more fanciful an item's form is, the better.
4 An ancient moonstone dragon's sibling, imprisoned
MOONSTONE DRAGON ART OBJECTS
for centuries in the Shadowfell, has finally returned
home as a shadow dragon. d8 Object
A statue of a beautiful Fey who appears to be laugh
MOONSTONE DRAGON LAIRS
ing, crying, or scowling, depending on the viewer's
Often, a moonstone dragon's lair is not a single mood; the dragon requires all who visit to describe
location, but rather a collection of personally sig the face and sends away anyone who sees an angry
nificant places spread out across multiple planes visage
of existence and connected through portals under
2 A string ofleaves collected from the rarest trees in
the dragon's control. A lair might include a secluded
the Feywild and then dipped in silver
grove on the Material Plane, a well-protected tower
in the Feywild, and even a hidden corner of the
Ethereal Plane. Moonstone dragons often use lo-
132 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
I ..4. .....
=== PAGE 134 ===
d8 Object RED DRAGONS
3 A small mithral ball that shows significant scuffing,
