Multiattack. The dragon turtle makes one Bite or Tail attack Bite. The dragon turtle makes one Bite attack.
and two Claw attacks. Armor of Storms (Costs 2 Actions). Lightning temporarily
surrounds the dragon turtle, and it gains 40 temporary hit
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar
points until the start of its next turn. Until all these tempo
get. Hit: 15 (ldl2 + 9) piercing damage plus 13 (2dl2) light
rary hit points are gone, any creature that touches the dragon
ning damage.
turtle or hits it with a melee attack takes 26 (4dl2) light-
ning damage.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 191
=== PAGE 193 ===
YOUNG DRAGON TuRTLE
Huge Dragon, Typically Neutral
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 178 (17dl2 + 68)
Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft. ,...
DRAGON TuRTLE WYRMLING
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA Large Dragon, Typically Neutral
21 (+5) 10 (+0) 19 (+4) 10 (+0) 12 (+l) 12 (+l)
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +8, Wis +5 Hit Points 90 (12dl0 + 24)
Damage Resistances fire Speed 20 ft., swim 30 ft.
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Aquan, Draconic STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4 17 (+3) 10 (+0) 15 (+2) 8 (-1) 10 (+0) 10 (+0)
Amphibious. The dragon turtle can breathe air and water. Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +4, Wis +2
Damage Resistances Ii re
ACTIONS Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Draconic
Multiattack. The dragon turtle makes one Bite attack and two
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar Amphibious. The dragon turtle can breathe air and water.
get. Hit: 11 (ldl2 + 5) piercing damage plus 6 (ldl2) light
ning damage. ACTIONS
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (ld8 + 5) slashing damage. Hit: 9 (ldl2 + 3) piercing damage.
Steam Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon turtle exhales scald Steam Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon turtle exhales ~
ing steam in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must scalding steam in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area
make a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw, taking 42 (12d6) fire must make a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 17 (5d6) fire
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a suc damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a suc
cessful one. Being underwater doesn't grant resistance against cessful one. Being underwater doesn't grant resistance against
this damage. this damage.
192 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
J
=== PAGE 194 ===
EGG HUNTERS
Egg hunters are parasites that seek out dragon eggs
and feed on the contents. They deposit their own
eggs into the empty shells, hiding the eggs from un
suspecting dragon parents or guardians.
EGG HUNTER HATCHLING
A dragon egg drained by an egg hunter is filled with
ld6 new eggs, which hatch inside the dragon egg's
shell in ld6 days. The egg hunter hatchlibgs burst
forth ld4 days later, using the needlelike egg tooth
that extends from their heads. They are voracious, Small Monstrosity, Unaligned
consuming any other dragon eggs in the vicinity if
they can. A hatchling matures into an adult about Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 52 (8d6 + 24)
twenty days after breaking free from its dragon egg.
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft.
EGG H UNTER A DULT
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
The salamander-like adult of the species can inflate 14 (+2) 20 (+5) 16 (+3) 3 (-4) 13 (+ 1) 5 (-3)
its bulbous tail so that it takes on the shape and
Saving Throws Dex +8, Wis +4
texture of a dragon egg. It uses this mimicry to es
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +11
tablish itself in a nest tended by a dragon or other
Condition Immunities frightened, poisoned
creatures. If an egg hunter is discovered, it releases Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14
spores that make other creatures lethargic, allow Languages-
ing it to scurry to safety. If things turn dire, the egg Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
hunter's physical form can magically harden, reduc
Amphibious. The egg hunter can breathe air and water.
ing the harm it suffers from even a dragon's wrath.
False Appearance. If the egg hunter is motionless at the start
of combat, it has advantage on its initiative roll. Moreover, if
EGG HUNTER HATCHLING
a creature hasn't observed the egg hunter move or act, that
Tiny Monstrosity, Unaligned
creature must succeed on a DC 18 Intelligence (Investigation)
check to discern that the egg hunter is animate. Dragons have
Armor Class 14 (natural armor) disadvantage on this check.
Hit Points 28 (8d4 + 8)
Speed 30 ft., burrow 10 ft., climb 30 ft. ACTIONS
Multiattack. The egg hunter makes two Barbed Proboscis at
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
tacks, and it can use Torpor Spores if it's available.
8 (-1) 17 (+3) 13 (+l) l (-5) 10 (+O) 5 (-3)
Barbed Proboscis. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
Saving Throws Dex +5, Wis +2 one target. Hit: 8 (ld6 + 5) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8) ne
Skills Perception +2, Stealth +7 crotic damage, and the egg hunter regains hit points equal to
Condition Immunities frightened the necrotic damage dealt.
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Torpor Spores (Recharge 5-6). The egg hunter releases a bil
Languages-
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2 low of sparkling blue spores. Each creature in a 30-foot-radius
sphere centered on the egg hunter must succeed on a DC 14
Amphibious. The egg hunter can breathe air and water. Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for l minute. While
poisoned in this way, the creature can take either an action
ACTIONS or a bonus action on its turn but not both, and it can't take
reactions. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
Multiattack. The egg hunter makes two Egg Tooth attacks.
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
Egg Tooth. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
get. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage, or 17 (4d6 + 3) piercing the creature is immune to this egg hunter's Torpor Spores for
damage if the target is an object. the next 24 hours.
BONUS ACTIONS REACTIONS
Rapid Movement. The egg hunter takes the Dash or Disen Rapid Adaptation. When the egg hunter takes damage, it gives
gage action. itself resistance to that damage.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 193
=== PAGE 195 ===
ELDER BRAIN DRAGON
One of the few consolations available to those who
must contend with a mind flayer colony is the limit
of its reach, which spreads only as far as the in
fluence of the colony's elder brain. But this small
solace withers away when a colony manages to
capture a dragon. Teams of mind flayers bind the
dragon, which is subject to a gruesome transforma
tion as the elder brain latches onto the dragon's back
and digs its tentacles into the dragon's brain. An
elder brain dragon is the nightmarish result.
Using the mobility of the dragon's body, the elder
brain can now serve as a powerful general to illithid
armies, free from the confines of its brine pool. The
elder brain dragon becomes a psychic threat in ad
dition to a physical one, its body rife with aberrant
influence and pulsing with psionic power. Even the
elder brain dragon's breath weapon mutates during
its transformation, becoming a stream of briny liq
uid roiling with illithid tadpoles. These tadpoles can
swiftly slay victims and transform them into mind
flayers, allowing the elder brain dragon to grow its
own roving colony.
or smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 18). The dragon can have
.:f*
up to four targets grappled at a time.
Gargantuan Aberration, Typically Lawful Evil
Tadpole Brine Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales
Armor Class 17 (natural armor) brine in a 120-foot line that is 15 feet wide. Each creature in
Hit Points 350 (20d20 + 140) that area must make a DC 22 Constitution saving throw, taking
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft. (hover) 55 (l0dl0) psychic damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one. On a success or failure, if the
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA creature isn't a Construct or an Undead, it becomes infested
27 (+8} 13 (+l} 25 (+7) 21 (+5) 19 (+4) 24 (+7) with illithid tadpoles.
While infested, the creature takes 16 (3dl0) psychic damage
Saving Throws Con +14, Int +12, Wis +11, Cha +14 at the start of each of its turns. The creature can repeat the sav
Skills Arcana +12, Insight +18, Perception +18 ing throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on
Damage Immunities psychic itself after it succeeds on three of these saves. If the creature
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened
is targeted by magic that ends a curse or restores 40 hit points
Senses blindsight 120 ft., passive Perception 28
or more, the tadpoles infesting the creature are killed instantly,
Languages Deep Speech, Draconic, telepathy 5 miles
ending the effect on the creature.
Challenge 22 (41,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
If a Humanoid is reduced to 0 hit points while infested, the
creature is stable but remains unconscious for 6dl 2 hours.
Legendary Resistance (4/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
When the period of unconsciousness ends, the creature trans
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
forms into a mind flayer (see the Monster Manual) with all its
Siege Monster. The dragon deals double damage to objects and hit points. Casting a wish spell on the unconscious creature
structures. rids it of the infestation and prevents it from turning into a
mind flayer.
Unusual Nature. The dragon doesn't require air or sleep.
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
ACTIONS
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack, two Claw at
options below. Only one legendary action can be used at a time
tacks, and one Tentacle attack.
and only at the end of another creature's turn. The dragon re
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar gains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
get. Hit: 19 (2dl0 + 8) piercing damage plus 11 (2dl0) psy
Tentacle. The dragon makes one Tentacle attack.
chic damage.
Shatter Concentration (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon targets a
Claw. Me lee Weapon Attack: +1 5 to hit, reach l 0 ft., one target. creature it is grappling. The target's concentration on a spell
Hit: 11 (ld6 + 8) slashing damage. it has cast or an ability it is maintaining ends, and the target
takes 19 (3dl2} psychic damage.
Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
creature. Hit: 12 (ld8 + 8) psychic damage. If the target is Huge
194 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
I
=== PAGE 196 ===
e
EMERALD DRAGONS
Emerald dragons are the most curious, cunning,
and manipulative of the gem dragons, wielding
psionic power to weave illusions to deceive and dis
orient. They cloak their own presence so they can
observe other creatures without being discovered
as they collect information on everything from local
cultural practices to supernatural occurrences.
SHIMMERING GREEN
A wyrmling emerald dragon's scales are a dull, pale
green, but they develop into richer and more varied
shades of green as the dragon ages. Eventually,
the scales become translucent and shimmer in the
light, rippling as the dragon moves. The dragon's
horns and spines hover above the body, moving
and shifting along the back and tail to mirror the
dragon's mood.
ANCIENT EMERALD DRAGON Disorienting Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales a wave
of psychic dissonance in a 90-foot cone. Each creature in that
Gargantuan Dragon (Gem), Typically Lawful Neutral
area must make a DC 22 Intelligence saving throw. On a failed
save, the creature takes 56 (l 6d6) psychic damage, and until
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
the end of its next turn, when the creature makes an attack roll
Hit Points 332 (19d20 + 133)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 80 ft. or an ability check, it must roll a d8 and reduce the total by the
number rolled. On a successful save, the creature takes half as
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA much damage with no additional effects.
25 (+7) 12 (+l) 25 (+7) 20 (+5) 18 (+4) 20 (+5) Spel/casting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +14, Wis +11, Cha +12 the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 20):
Skills Arcana +12, Deception +12, Perception +18, Stealth +8
At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible), minor illusion
Damage Resistances fire, psychic
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., 1/day each: detect thoughts, dispel magic, etherealness, major
image, mislead
passive Perception 28
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft.
BONUS ACTIONS
Challenge 21 (33,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
Change Shape. The dragon magically transforms into any crea
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving ture that is Medium or Small, while retaining its game statistics
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. (other than its size). This transformation ends if the dragon is
reduced to O hit points or uses a bonus action to end it.
Tunneler. The dragon can burrow through solid rock at half
its burrowing speed and can leave a 20-foot-diameter tunnel Psychic Step. The dragon magically teleports to an unoccupied
in its wake. space it can see within 60 feet of it.
Warp Perception (1/Day). The dragon can cast mirage arcane,
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as the
spellcasting ability. The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
ACTIONS at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks. Claw. The dragon makes one Claw attack.
Psionics (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon uses Psychic Step or
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar- ,_;; . Spellcasting.
get. Hit: 18 (2d10 + 7) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) psy- ,,.,
Emerald Embers (Costs 3 Actions). The dragon creates a danc
chic damage. ing mote of green flame around a creature it can see within
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. ~ 60 feet ofit. The target must succeed on a DC 20 Dexterity
Hit: 14 (2d6 + 7) slashing damage. saving throw or take 42 (l 2d6) fire damage.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 195
=== PAGE 197 ===
CLEVER CONCEALMENT
The shyest of the gem dragons, emerald dragons
are also the most curious. They love to observe local
settlements and peoples, using their psionic abilities
to cloak themselves and watch from afar. When an Emerald dragons' preference for volcanic lairs
emerald dragon is old enough, the dragon might often puts them in conflict with fire giants. Despite
take on the guise of a creature that can blend in with their reluctance to reveal themselves to strangers,
the local population, or at least get close without emerald dragons might approach experienced ad
arousing suspicion. Once in a position to observe, venturers in the hopes of pitting them against fire
the dragon studies the day-to-day life of local folk, giant rivals.
with a keen interest in any magical phenomena.
H OARDED HISTORIES
Emerald dragons' attentiveness to unusual events
makes them particularly useful to their sapphire Emerald dragons prize knowledge, particularly local
dragon cousins, who hunt down Aberrations and histories that focus on magical events and individu
seek evidence of Far Realm incursions into the als. They usually know of places of power near their
Material Plane. These gem dragons often work to lairs and keep detailed records of how phenomena
gether, with emerald dragons tracking the source connected to those sites react to outside influences.
of an incursion while sapphire dragons plan and They also avidly collect magic items and spells that
execute a decisive purge-or recruit agents to do create illusions, allowing them to better conceal
it for them. their treasures from prying eyes and divinations.
ADULT EMERALD DRAGON Disorienting Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales a wave
of psychic dissonance in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that
-Hu-ge -Dra-go-n (G-em-), -Typ-ica-lly -La-wfu-l N-eu-tral- -----~':~'T ., ..
area must make a DC 18 Intelligence saving throw. On a failed
"1 - save, the creature takes 42 (12d6) psychic damage, and until
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
the end of its next turn, when the creature makes an attack roll
Hit Points 207 (18dl2 + 90)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 80 ft. or an ability check, it must roll a d6 and reduce the total by the
number rolled. On a successful save, the creature takes half as
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA much damage with no additional effects.
23 (+6) 12 (+l) 21 (+5) 18 (+4) 16 (+3) 18 (+4) Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +10, Wis +8, Cha +9 the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 17):
Skills Arcana +9, Deception +9, Perception +13, Stealth +6
At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible), minor illusion
Damage Resistances fire, psychic
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., 1/day each: detect thoughts, dispel magic, invisibility,
major image
passive Perception 23
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft.
BONUS ACTIONS
Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Change Shape. The dragon magically transforms into any crea
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving "~ ture that is Medium or Small, while retaining its game statistics
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. (other than its size). This transformation ends if the dragon is
reduced to O hit points or uses a bonus action to end it.
Shift Perception (1/Day). The dragon can cast hallucinatory ter
rain, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as Psychic Step. The dragon magically teleports to an unoccupied
the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 17). space it can see within 60 feet of it.
Tunneler. The dragon can burrow through solid rock at half
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
its burrowing speed and can leave a 15-foot-diameter tunnel
in its wake. The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
ACTIONS at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks. Claw. The dragon makes one Claw attack.
Psionics (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon uses Psychic Step or
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar
Spellcasting.
get. Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) psy-
Emerald Embers (Costs 3 Actions). The dragon creates a danc
chic damage. ing mote of green flame around a creature it can see within
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 60 feet ofit. The target must succeed on a DC 17 Dexterity
Hit: 10 (ld8 + 6) slashing damage. saving throw or take 31 (9d6) fire damage.
196 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 198 ===
YOUNG EMERALD DRAGON
Large Dragon (Gem), Typically Lawful Neutral
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 142 (15d10 + 60)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 60 ft. , ;
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
21 (+5) 12 (+1) 19 (+4) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 16 (+3)
Medium Dragon (Gem), Typically Lawful Neutral
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +7, Wis +5, Cha +6
.
Skills Arcana +6, Deception +6, Perception +8, Stealth +4 Armor Class 16 (natural armor) ,..
\
Damage Resistances fire, psychic Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12)
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., Speed 30 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 60 ft.
passive Perception 18
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft. STR DEX CON INT WIS
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3 15 (+2) 12 (+1) 15 (+2) 14 (+2) 12 (+1)
Tunneler. The dragon can burrow through solid rock at half Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +4, Wis +3, Cha +4
its burrowing speed and can leave a 10-foot-diameter tunnel Skills Arcana +4, Deception +4, Perception +5, Stealth +3 "
in its wake. Damage Resistances fire, psychic
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
ACTIONS Languages Draconic, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Tunneler. The dragon can burrow through solid rock at half
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar its burrowing speed and can leave a 5-foot-diameter tunnel
get. Hit: 16 (2d10 + 5) piercing damage plus 3 (ld6) psy in its wake.
chic damage.
Ii-
ACTIONS
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (ld6 + 5) slashing damage. Bite. Me/ee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ldl0 + 2) piercing damage plus 3 (ld6) psychic damage.
Disorienting Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales a wave
of psychic dissonance in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that Disorienting Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales a wave
area must make a DC 15 Intelligence saving throw. On a failed of psychic dissonance in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that
save, the creature takes 31 (9d6) psychic damage, and until the area must make a DC 12 Intelligence saving throw. On a failed
end of its next turn, when the creature makes an attack roll or save, the creature takes 17 (5d6) psychic damage, and until the
an ability check, it must roll a d6 and reduce the total by the end of its next turn, when the creature makes an attack roll or
number rolled. On a successful save, the creature takes half as an ability check, it must roll a d4 and reduce the total by the
much damage with no additional effects. number rolled. On a successful save, the creature takes half as
much damage with no additional effects.
Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 14): spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 12):
At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible), minor illusion ~ -•
1/ day each: detect thoughts, invisibility, silent image At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible), minor illusion
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 197
=== PAGE 199 ===
,0
•
.~
I! - -
• i
I
• \
. Emerald dragons dwell in enormous caverns, lava
tubes, and tunnel networks deep within the earth.
•
They favor warm spaces, particularly in volcanic
regions. Over time, their psychic presence seeps
into the land surrounding their lairs, expanding
their awareness and subconsciously luring their
favorite food-giant lizards-to settle and thrive in
•
the region.
Emerald dragons use the features of their lairs to
confuse and imperil intruders. They dig additional
Vanish. The dragon becomes invisible until initia-
tunnels that allow them to move through their lairs
tive count 20 on the next round.
in multiple ways and set traps leading to yawning
chasms or pools and flows of lava.
REGIONAL EFFECTS
Emerald dragons take great pains to hide the
The region surrounding a legendary emerald
chambers that house their hoards and collected
dragon's lair is altered by the dragon's magic, creat
lore, often using illusion magic and subtle construc
ing one or more of the following effects:
tion around the natural features of their lairs to con
Crystal Profusion. Natural stone within 6 miles
ceal their central hoard chambers from mundane
of the lair grows plentiful crystal formations and
and magical sight.
veins of emerald gemstones.
The challenge rating of a legendary emerald
Fiery Sight. Fire and lava within 6 miles of the lair
dragon increases by 1 when it's encountered
become conduits for the dragon's psionic pres
in its lair.
ence. As an action, the dragon can cast the clair
LAIR ACTIONS voyance spell, requiring no spell components and
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the targeting any area of fire or lava in that region.
dragon can take one of the following lair actions; Subtle Obstruction. Rocks within 6 miles of the
the dragon can't take the same lair action two dragon's lair sometimes move of their own accord,
rounds in a row: usually when no one is watching. Often the rocks
obstruct the approach to the emerald dragon's
Beguiling Whisper. The dragon telepathically whis
lair, with boulders moving to block narrow defiles,
pers to one creature within range of the dragon's
way-markers tumbling off the path, or smaller
telepathy. The creature must succeed on a DC
stones shifting beneath travelers' feet to send
15 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by the
them tumbling down slopes or into rivers.
dragon until initiative count 20 on the next round.
Thriving Wildlife. Giant lizards are attracted to the
A creature charmed in this way obeys to the best
area within 6 miles of the lair and settle there in
of its ability any command the dragon issues that
large numbers.
isn't directly harmful to the creature.
Distort Perceptions. The dragon attempts to alter If the dragon dies, the population of giant lizards
the perceptions of one creature it can see within near the lair returns to normal levels over the
its lair. That creature must succeed on a DC 15 In course of ldlO days. Rocks immediately stop mov
telligence saving throw or take 22 (4dl0) psychic ing of their own accord. The existing abundance of
damage and have disadvantage on saving throws crystals and emeralds remains, but new ones form
until the start of its next turn. at a normal rate.
198 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
I
=== PAGE 200 ===
•
•
•
•
"-
_,,.,_
\\
-,J,j
I, ·'
.• .. ··
.. , "° . ,
EYEDRAKE
When a beholder contends with a dragon for power
and wealth, its thoughts of its dragon rival can
become deeply obsessive, eventually pervading
the beholder's dreams. If the rivalry lasts long
enough, these fevered dreams can manifest as
an eyedrake-a beholder-like creature with dra
conic features.
An eyedrake resembles a winged draconic crea
ture with no true limbs and a perpetually open
mouth. Inside that mouth is a large eye that emits a
breath-like wave of antimagic energy. The creature's
wings are formed from multiple eyestalks, each of
which can fire magical rays that combine aspects
of a dragon's breath weapon attacks and a behold
er's eye rays.
An eyedrake left to its own devices exhibits much
of the stereotypical behavior of a young dragon, at
tempting to establish a lair and a hoard. Driven by
instinct to jealously defend its hoard, an eyedrake
fights to the death if anything threatens even the
smallest trinket it claims as its own.
EYEDRAKE one. Every spell of 3rd level or lower ends on creatures and
objects of the eyed rake's choice in that area.
Large Aberration, Typically Lawful Evil
Eye Rays. The eyedrake shoots three of the following magical
Armor Class 16 (natural armor) \. eye rays at random (reroll duplicates), each ray targeting one
Hit Points 119 (14d10 + 42) \, creature it can see within 60 feet of it:
Speed Oft., fly 30 ft. (hover)
1: Freezing Ray. The target must make a DC 14 Constitution
saving throw. On a failed save, the target takes 17 (5d6) cold
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
damage, and its speed is halved until the end of its next turn.
16 (+3) 10 (+O) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 16 (+3)
On a successful save, the target takes half as much damage
with no additional effects.
Saving Throws Con +6, Wis +5 2: Debilitating Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 14 Con
Skills Perception +8, Stealth +6 '- stitution saving throw or take 7 (2d6) thunder damage and
Condition Immunities prone • c become incapacitated until the end of its next turn.
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18 ·" 3: Repulsion Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 14 Strength
Languages Deep Speech, Draconic saving throw or take 14 (4d6) force damage and be pushed
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3 up to 60 feet away from the eyed rake.
4: Fire Ray. The target must make a DC 14 Dexterity saving
Unusual Nature. The eyedrake doesn't require food or drink. throw, taking 21 (6d6) fire damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one.
ACTIONS 5: Paralyzing Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 14 Consti
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. tution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The target
Hit: 13 (3d6 + 3) piercing damage. can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns,
ending the effect on itself on a success.
Antimagic Breath (Recharge 6). The eyed rake emits a magic 6: Death Ray. The target must make a DC 14 Dexterity saving
wave in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a throw, taking 28 (8d6) necrotic damage on a failed save, or
DC 14 Constitution saving throw, taking 39 (6d12) force dam half as much damage on a successful one. The target dies if
age on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful the ray reduces it to O hit points.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 199
=== PAGE 201 ===
GEM GREATWYRM
More so even than their chromatic and metallic
kin, gem dragons are fascinated with cultivating
their dragonsight and fusing the awareness of their
echoes across the Material Plane. Some of them be
lieve that, by doing so, they are taking steps toward
reuniting the shattered consciousness of Sardior
the Ruby Dragon, and they pursue this awakening
as an act of near-religious devotion. Others seek to
exploit their knowledge of the many worlds of the
Material Plane as a source of power-and indeed, a
SARDIOR1S GREATWYRMS
gem dragon who becomes a greatwyrm has access
Five gem greatwyrms call themselves the thanes of
to almost unimaginable power.
Sardior and believe themselves responsible for pre
Gem greatwyrms' ascension transforms their
serving the memory of their long-lost progenitor.
bodies to appear as crystal, their scales sparkling These greatwyrms are named Aleithilithos (an ame
like diamonds. Their breath weapons become pow thyst greatwyrm), Hrodel (a crystal greatwyrm), Smar
erful waves of crushing force that can stop almost gad {an emerald greatwyrm), Charsima (a sapphire
any creature in its tracks. But the greatwyrms' most greatwyrm), and Tithonnas (a topaz greatwyrm). Each
thane is actively seeking out their echoes across the
powerful ability is telekinesis on an unparalleled
worlds of the Material Plane, hoping to merge with
scale-a gem greatwyrm can telekinetically seize
these other dragons, with the goal of eventually uniting
an entire crowd, then carry those helpless folk off to
themselves to re-form the great Ruby Dragon.
the dragon's lair.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 202 ===
th
The:- ing- I mi~~ Mo~t c1bovt Sc1Ydioy i~
the:- thing- t10 f¥'M g-e:-c1-fwrm wi({ e:-Ve:,y
Ye:-pYodvu-: the:- wirti, c1nu.,Jof~. Whid,
we:,y~ I gnnt 10v, Mo~t/1 c1bovt Me:-.
-nzban ·•
•
•••
GEM GREATWYRM On a successful save, it takes half as much damage and isn't
knocked prone. On a success or failure, the creature's speed
Gargantuan Dragon (Gem), Typically Neutral
becomes O until the end of its next turn.
•
Armor Class 21 (natural armor) Mass Telekinesis (Gem Awakening Only; Recharges after a
Hit Points 507 (26d20 + 234) Short or Long Rest). The greatwyrm targets any number of
Speed 60 ft., burrow 60 ft., fly 120 ft. (hover), swim 60 ft. creatures and objects it can see within 120 feet of it. No one
target can weigh more than 4,000 pounds, and objects can't
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA be targeted if they're being worn or carried. Each targeted
28 (+9) 14 (+2) 29 (+9) 30 (+10) 24 (+7) 25 (+7) creature must succeed on a DC 26 Strength saving throw or be
restrained in the greatwyrm's telekinetic grip. At the end of a
Saving Throws Dex +10, Con +17, Wis +15, Cha +15 q- ,•t creature's turn, it can repeat the saving throw, ending the effect
Skills Arcana +26, History +18, Perception +15 on itself on a success.
Damage Immunities force (amethyst), necrotic (topaz), psychic At the end of the greatwyrm's turn, it can move each creature
(emerald), radiant (crystal), or thunder (sapphire)
or object it has in its telekinetic grip up to 60 feet in any direc
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned, prone
tion, but not beyond 120 feet of itself. In addition, it can choose
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 25
any number of creatures restrained in this way and deal 45
Languages Common, Draconic
(7dl2) force damage to each of them.
Challenge 26 (90,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +8
Spel/casting (Psionics). The greatwyrm casts one of the fol
Gem Awakening (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If the lowing spells, requiring no spell components and using Intel
greatwyrm would be reduced to O hit points, its current hit ligence as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 26, +18 to hit
point total instead resets to 400 hit points, it recharges its with spell attack):
Breath Weapon, and it regains any expended uses of Legend 1/day each: dispel magic.forcecage, plane shift, reverse grav
ary Resistance. Additionally, the greatwyrm can now use its ity, time stop
Mass Telekinesis action during the next hour. Award a party an
.... •t
additional 90,000 XP (180,000 XP total) for defeating the great BONUS ACTIONS
wyrm after its Gem Awakening activates.
Change Shape. The greatwyrm magically transforms into any
Legendary Resistance (4/Day). If the greatwyrm fails a saving creature that is Medium or Small, while retaining its game
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. statistics (other than its size). This transformation ends if the
greatwyrm is reduced to O hit points or uses a bonus action
Unusual Nature. The greatwyrm doesn't require food or drink.
.. to end it.
-AC-T-IO-NS- ------------------ Psychic Step. The greatwyrm magically teleports to an unoccu
...
Multiattack. The greatwyrm makes one Bite attack and two t pied space it can see within 60 feet ofit.
Claw attacks.
