having a mate the bigger, the better!
10 An idol of an obscure minor divinity; the dragon 8 Conflict drives evolution. By sparking wars between
addresses it reverently as "O mighty Froglet" (its nations, I contribute to the advancement of their
shape is only vaguely frog-like) civilizations. (And they pay me for it, too!)
94 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
l J
I ......Ill
=== PAGE 96 ===
BRONZE DRAGON IDEALS
d8 Adventure Hook
d6 Ideal 5 The bronze dragon who protects a coastal nation
Action. Passivity is shameful. We owe it to the world is stricken by a curse, and the cure lies in a sunken
and ourselves to try to improve things, even if we temple the dragon destroyed generations ago.
can't guarantee success. (Any)
6 Believing that the winner of a city's democratic elec
2 Analysis. When possible, dig into the root of a tion is unworthy of the job, a bronze dragon is now
conflict before committing to end it, to ensure you supporting an authoritarian leader instead.
aren't fighting for the wrong side. (Any) 7 A bronze dragon has been approached by both
3 Honor. I never lie outright, though I choose my sides in a war and needs agents to get close to both
words carefully. I will fight to the death rather than leaders to discover which has the worthier claim.
break my word or abandon a comrade. (Lawful)
8 A bronze dragon fears that a remote library-fortress
4 Discipline. Disorganization breeds defeat. I demand is no longer the best place to safeguard an infa
self-control from both myself and those who fight mous tome called the Antitheorem Codex-and has
beside me. (Lawful) decided to prove it by attacking the site.
5 Guardianship. It's the duty of the strong to protect
CONNECTED CREATURES
the weak. (Good)
Bronze dragons admire high-minded ambition and
6 Dominance. Anyone who opposes my will is either
military prowess, seeking out those beings willing
an underling to be punished or an enemy to be van
to risk their lives in the fight for justice. Though they
quished. (Evil)
are as proud as any dragons, bronze dragons would
rather serve alongside heroes than rule over cow
BRONZE DRAGON SPELLCASTING ards and quislings.
Spell
Age Save DC Spells Known BRONZE DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS
Young 14 beast sense, detect thoughts, speak d6 Connected Creatures
with animals A flight of pseudodragons has raised an orphaned
Adult 17 beast sense, control water, detect bronze dragon wyrmling, who is quickly growing too
thoughts, speak with animals large for the group's usual activities.
Ancient 20 beast sense, control water, detect 2 A knight rescued a bronze dragon wyrmling from
thoughts, heroes'feast,* speak with sacrifice at the hands of a cult, and the two now
animals travel together in search of wrongs to right.
*This spell's casting time is longer than l action. 3 A bronze dragon wyrmling's murdered tutor rose as
a revenant, and the dragon seeks anyone who can
BRONZE DRAGON ADVENTURES
help obtain justice.
The Bronze Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
4 A bronze dragon wyrmling has chosen a lair filled
suggestions for stories and adventures involving
with poisonous snakes, admiring the elegance with
bronze dragons.
which they slither through the flooded tunnels.
5 A bronze dragon wyrmling has been captured by sa
BRONZE DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
huagin raiders and manipulated into serving as the
d8 Adventure Hook
band's icon and war leader.
Attempts to salvage a sunken merchant ship are
6 A group of merrow stole a bronze dragon wyrm
being thwarted by a bronze dragon who claims
ling's hoard, and the wyrmling is training a plesio
"finder's rights."
saurus to help attack the merrow's stronghold.
2 Betrayed by corrupt city officials, a bronze dragon is
punishing the city by preventing ships from entering
YOUNG BRONZE DRAGON CONNECTIONS
its harbor, but the citizens are suffering.
d6 Connected Creatures
3 A bronze dragon gathers crusaders to rescue a hero
A guardian naga and a young bronze dragon each
imprisoned in the Abyss-a mission that will mean
defend half of an artifact called the Sundered Crown.
almost certain death for the rank-and-file troops.
2 A young bronze dragon and a medusa have been
4 A bronze dragon has conscripted a local militia into
enemies for so long that they've developed mutual
an ongoing conflict with a black dragon who lives in
respect, communicating by way of a magical book
the waterlogged ruins of a magical academy.
that teleports back and forth between them.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 95
=== PAGE 97 ===
d6 Connected Creatures d4 Connected Creatures
3 A young bronze dragon seeks to turn a band of cy 3 An ancient bronze dragon controls a network of pri
clopes into a disciplined army, with little success. vateers who prey on pirates and accept government
4 A young bronze dragon has been magically bound commissions if the dragon deems a cause worthy.
to the service of a marid, and the dragon is unable 4 An ancient bronze dragon guards a merfolk mon
to take direct action to get free of the genie. astery that's risen mysteriously from the depths,
5 A young bronze dragon runs a prestigious military prompting attacks by greedy coastal nations even as
academy, training paladins of smaller species to the monks warn of a coming apocalypse.
fight for justice beneath the dragon's banner.
BRONZE DRAGON LAIRS
6 Dragonborn pirates bribe a young bronze dragon
Bronze dragons typically dwell along rocky and in
into helping them steal ship cargoes for a sizable
accessible coastlines. Some make dry homes atop
cut of the profits.
lonely sea stacks, while others favor completely
submerged lairs in sunken ruins. Many seek out
ADULT BRONZE DRAGON CONNECTIONS
strongholds straddling land and sea, with both dry
d8 Connected Creatures
and flooded chambers.
A rakshasa disguised as a pirate lord seeks revenge When it comes to lairs, bronze dragons value func
on the adult bronze dragon who has killed the Fiend tion over form, and they study potential sites with a
three times so far. military commander's eye for defense. They appreci
2 An adult bronze dragon regularly consults a storm ate the solidity of cliff-side caves or stone fortresses,
often reinforcing existing defenses with clever traps
giant whose prophecies give hints as to which con
and bulwarks. At the same time, bronze dragons
flicts the dragon should seek out and engage in.
understand that they are their own best defense in a
3 An adult bronze dragon keeps a roe as a beloved pet
siege, so they are careful to maximize their mobility
and views the creature's predations on local settle
with multiple ways in and out of their lairs.
ments as simply part of the natural order.
4 An adult bronze dragon swore an oath to a comrade BRONZE DRAGON LAIR FEATURES
The bronze dragon lair shown on map 5.5 is a set
who later became a vampire. The dragon reluctantly
of sea caves that once served as a dwarven military
continues to protect the vampire, all the while
outpost. The lair has the following features:
searching for a way to reverse the transformation.
5 An adult bronze dragon sends regular tributes of Sentinel Statue. In a hidden cove sheltered from
the sea, a statue of a dour elf queen watches over
treasure to an adult topaz dragon, not wanting the
a small beach. The statue's eyes are magically
topaz dragon's enmity to become a threat to coastal
warded to alert the dragon of intruders.
communities under the bronze dragon's protection.
Campaign Chamber. Beyond the beach stands a
6 An archmage and an adult bronze dragon who
pillared dwarven hall whose walls have begun
have been friends since they fought together in the to crumble near the entrances. Here the dragon
mage's youth often visit each other to share stories. grants audiences and presides over councils of
7 An adult bronze dragon attempting to raise a clutch war, surrounded by trophies chosen to remind
of wyrmlings alone is in desperate need of tutors viewers of the dragon's heroic history.
Lofty Alcove. Up a steep set of stairs at the bottom
and babysitters who can survive the assignment.
right of the map lies a dry chamber that serves as
8 An obsessed shadow dragon plots to trap an adult
barracks for guests and a library for documents
bronze dragon in the Shadowfell until the bronze
too fragile to survive in damp conditions.
dragon too is transformed.
Island Larder. Another elevated chamber carved
into the cliffs of a small island abutting the beach
ANCIENT BRONZE DRAGON CONNECTIONS
(in the center right of the map) serves as a larder
d4 Connected Creatures in case of a siege. It also houses a clever series of
An ancient bronze dragon is locked in a centu mirrors arranged throughout the stone to allow
ries-old conflict with a kraken that destroyed a set the dragon to observe the seascape unnoticed.
Watery Caves. Two chambers near the top of the
tlement under the bronze dragon's protection.
map are accessible only via submerged tunnels,
2 Two ancient dragons, one bronze and one silver,
their entrances disguised with thick seaweed and
support different nations locked in a war, each be
boulders. The larger cavern on the right is the
lieving that their side has the moral high ground.
dragon's sleeping chamber, while the smaller on
the left holds most of the dragon's hoard.
96 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 98 ===
BRONZE DRAGON LAIR
MAP 5.5
~
t.J
9
z
~ 1 square = 10 feet
i5
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 97
=== PAGE 99 ===
ADDITIONAL LAIR ACTIONS BRONZE DRAGON TREASURES
At your discretion, a legendary (adult or ancient)
A bronze dragon's hoard is a history of the dragon's
bronze dragon can use one or more of the following
deeds, with trophies from fallen foes and payment
additional lair actions while in its lair:
from grateful petitioners resting alongside more
Ocean's Call. The dragon conjures a swarm of spec mundane spoils of war and loot salvaged from
tral dolphins. Each creature in the water within shipwrecks and the seabed. Though these dragons
120 feet of the dragon must succeed on a DC 15 rarely steal outright, a several-ton bronze dragon
Dexterity saving throw or take 5 (ldlO) slashing landing near- or even on-a merchant ship asking
damage; then the swarm vanishes. to trade often obtains extremely one-sided bargains
Salt Burst. The dragon chooses a point it can see from unnerved sailors.
in the lair. The air in a 20-foot-radius sphere cen Bronze dragons have a romantic view of their role
tered on that point bursts with abrasive salt crys as guardians of justice and prefer treasures that tie
tals. Each creature in that area must succeed on into their heroic narrative. Their hoards teem with
a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or take 10 (3d6) weapons, armor, and magic items built for the bat
slashing damage. tlefield-the more unique, the better. Stories matter
Whelming Water. The dragon causes a strong to a bronze dragon, who would rather have the hum
current to course through the water in its lair. ble spear that felled a tyrant than a jeweled blade
The dragon chooses any number of creatures it that's never seen combat. They love collecting and
can see that are standing or swimming in water studying histories that can give them tactical insight
within 120 feet of it. Each chosen creature must or inspiration, as well as safeguarding artifacts they
succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be deem too dangerous to entrust to anyone else.
knocked prone.
BRONZE DRAGON ART OBJECTS
REGIONAL EFFECTS
dlO Object
Any of these effects might appear in the area around
A painting of the bronze dragon alongside a human
a bronze dragon's lair, in addition to or instead of
the effects described in the Monster Manual: woman wearing an outdated military uniform
2 An ornate, mostly complete collection of Oristene's
Phantom Escort. Ghostly naval ships from an
multi-volume Military History oft he Outer Planes
ancient armada appear, escorting well-meaning
creatures in need of the dragon's help toward the 3 A heavy cloak of shimmering blue scales, with an
dragon's lair. attached half-mask
Underwater Pursuit. Sailors glimpse the shadowy, 4 An oversized key of living wood, with seemingly
illusory form of a dragon in the depths below natural whorls in the bark that form the words, "For
them, keeping pace with their vessel.
service not forgotten"
Unfailing Faithfulness. Sapient creatures that
5 A dragon-sized drinking vessel crafted from a behir
spend a year within 10 miles of the dragon's lair
horn
find it nearly impossible to break a promise.
6 Framed blueprints of a siege engine called the
flREFLASH Moonhammer
Also known as Khirsah, Fireflash is a gregarious and 7 An aquatic howdah made of sharkskin and bearing
inquisitive bronze dragon with a keen interest in other an emblem of a lonely black tower perched high
species, especially dwarves and elves. During the War
atop a sea stack
of the Lance, he was one of the first to answer the
call of Silvara-the elf identity of the silver dragon 8 A statue of a dishonored elf general, which is sur
D'argent-for the metallic dragons to join the conflict. rounded by historical treatises recounting the gener
During the Vingaard Campaign, Fireflash teamed
al's disgrace and notes that suggest the dragon has
up with a dwarf named Flint Fireforge and a kender
vowed to redeem this former hero
named Tasslehoff Burrfoot to capture High master Ba
karis. Later, in the Blue Lady's War, Tasslehoff foresaw 9 An idol of an insectile devil, with a blindfold tied
Fireflash's demise at the hands of the death knight carefully around its compound eyes
Lord Soth-and was thus able to avert the dragon's
10 An elaborate clockwork zoetrope that, when acti
grim fate.
After the wars, Fireflash faded from public view, but vated, displays a moving picture of a bronze dragon
rumor holds that he continues his lifelong fight against fighting a red dragon over a burning city
evil, using his legendary skill in aerial combat to assist
the Knights ofSolamnia.
98 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
l J '
.....i
=== PAGE 100 ===
(OPPER DRAGONS
d6 Ideal
3 Creativity. Our purpose is to create something new
and clever, and I admire those who do so. (Any)
I kne-w a c.-oppe-v dr-a9'n who lovu-1
4 Change. The only constant is change, and we must
c.-oini~ wovd<;. We- have- he-v to fhank change with the world. (Chaotic)
fov wovd<; like- <cov~niu/ <tpillov-.,;i' 5 Fairness. Life is often unfair, and it is up to us to re
balance its scales from time to time. (Good)
<cc.-o91iz..an~,, <cbvv~n/ and Jo~,, to naMe-
6 Cruelty. Existence is a cruel joke. You can either be
jv<;t a fe-w. It wovld Make- he-v lav&i in on the joke, or be made a fool by it. (Evil)
to folow how offon pe-ople- Make- -the,<;e
COPPER DRAGON SPELLCASTING
vidic....vlov<; c.-oMbi na-tion<; of <;ovnd<;!
Spell
Age Save DC Spells Known
-Pizban
Young 13 lesser restoration, phantasmal force
Adult 16 lesser restoration, phantasmal force,
Use the tables, map, and other information in this sec stone shape
tion to craft unique encounters with copper dragons. Ancient 19 lesser restoration, move earth, phan
tasmal force, stone shape
CREATING A COPPER D RAGON
Use the Copper Dragon Personality Traits and Cop COPPER DRAGON ADVENTURES
per Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal
The Copper Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
of distinctive copper dragon characters, and use
suggestions for stories and adventures involving
the Copper Dragon Spellcasting table to help select
copper dragons.
spells for a spellcasting dragon.
COPPER DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
COPPER DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS
d8 Adventure Hook
d8 Trait
A copper dragon holds an annual competition of
I am generous with my time, my words, and my con
poetry and music. The winner dwells with and en
siderable wisdom-but my treasure is mine.
tertains the dragon for a year-providing a perfect
2 I love music. It is truly the universal language, able
opportunity to access the dragon's lair and hoard.
to express ideas far better than mere words alone.
2 An area of reputedly haunted hills is the domain of a
3 I find the notion of trade and barter fascinating, and
copper dragon, who takes advantage of local legend
sometimes even find ways to participate in them.
and trickery for amusement and to deter intruders.
4 There is no sound I love more than laughter, a pow
3 A copper dragon is found half buried in a rock slide,
erful balm for hearts and minds.
badly injured and unable to recall what happened
5 I enjoy games of all kinds, especially challenges of or the location of the dragon's lair.
wit and intellect-and those I can decisively win.
4 A reclusive, eccentric noble who sometimes em
6 I admire how brightly short-lived creatures shine ploys adventurers turns out to be a copper dragon
before their lights go out. working through various intermediaries.
7 Nothing is more satisfying than deflating the egos 5 An adult copper dragon wants griffons nesting near
of the high-and-mighty with a well-placed jibe. the dragon's lair gone but hopes to have the grif
8 When I'm bored, stirring up a settlement and fons-and their eggs-relocated rather than killed.
watching its people scurry about amuses me. 6 A message found in the Underdark was meant for
a copper dragon, who has believed for generations
COPPER DRAGON IDEALS that the message's original bearer betrayed them.
d6 Ideal 7 A copper dragon has been trying to engineer peace
Beauty. The ability to create, appreciate, and sustain for two nearby domains by facilitating a romance
beauty is the true measure of a creature or civiliza between the heirs of those lands' rulers.
tion. (Good) 8 A hobgoblin warlord scarred by a copper dragon
2 Curiosity. The world holds so much to experience. I in youth has raised an army to slay the dragon and
value different perspectives and insights. (Any) plunder the dragon's hoard.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 99
=== PAGE 101 ===
CONNECTED CREATURES d8 Connected Creatures
Copper dragons are most interested in creatures
3 A galeb duhr acts as the guardian of an adult copper
they find entertaining or amusing, whether for their
dragon's hoard.
artistic abilities or because they are fun to trick
and tease. 4 An adult copper dragon regularly visits the treants
of the nearby forest to help protect their woods
COPPER DRACON WYRMLINC CONNECTIONS from encroachment.
d6 Connected Creatures 5 A band of fomorians believe they have allied with
A flock of aarakocra shelters a copper dragon wyrm a red dragon to burn a Feywild grove, but an adult
ling from gargoyles hunting in the mountains. copper dragon has deceived them.
2 A copper dragon wyrmling guards a hidden pass 6 An adult copper dragon serves as the patron of a
that leads into a sylvan valley populated by cen community of gnome tinkerers, who present their
taurs, pixies, and satyrs. best ideas to the dragon in hopes of being funded.
3 A copper dragon wyrmling has killed a number 7 A community of stone giants believes an adult cop
of domestic animals. A group of druids wants the per dragon is a key figure in a prophecy-and the
wyrmling captured and relocated, rather than killed. dragon has decided to play along for fun.
4 A ruined manor house being reclaimed by a newly 8 An adult copper dragon sends agents into a goristro
titled noble is the lair of a copper dragon wyrmling. demon's labyrinth to steal a lost soul, as part of a
centuries-long game.
5 A copper dragon wyrmling follows a wizard every
where, fascinated by prestidigitation tricks.
ANCIENT COPPER DRAGON CONNECTIONS
6 An ettin is trying to keep a captured copper dragon
d4 Connected Creatures
wyrmling as a pet.
An ancient copper dragon and an ancient red
YOUNG COPPER DRAGON CONNECTIONS dragon have been playing a complex game of strat
egy for centuries, using whole communities as their
d6 Connected Creatures
pawns and nations as their game board.
A young copper dragon has enticed a band of
2 An ancient copper dragon guards the sealed en
kobolds to undertake activities for the dragon's
trance to a ruined temple filled with devils.
amusement-and to rein in the band's more cha
otic tendencies. 3 A renowned gnome trickster, now deceased, so im
pressed an ancient copper dragon that the dragon
2 The head of a local thieves' guild is a young copper
assumes the gnome's form from time to time to
dragon who delights in tales of daring thefts and
help keep their legend alive.
skims the best stolen art objects as tribute.
4 The ancient copper dragon progenitor of a lineage
3 A young copper dragon needs aid to root out a behir
of dragon-blooded sorcerers likes to check in on
that has claimed the dragon's lair.
these descendants from time to time.
4 A band of raiders tithes treasure and tales to a
young copper dragon, in exchange for using the
canyons around the dragon's lair as a haven. GALADAEROS THE SUNSET FLAME
The copper dragon Galadaeros claims the islands
5 A dryad dwelling in the woods near a young copper
known as the Purple Rocks in the Trackless Sea of
dragon's lair helps to ward off intruders. Faerun as his territory. For centuries, Galadaeros was
6 A child's imaginary friend is a very real young cop content in his isolated home. Then the adventurer Ran
ressa Shiard was shipwrecked on the isles. Galadaeros
per dragon who can cast invisibility.
befriended her after she made several failed attempts
to slay him, and he eventually became mentor and ally
ADULT COPPER DRAGON CONNECTIONS to an adventuring company she named in his honor.
The dragon provided the adventurers with a safe haven
d8 Connected Creatures
and received a share in their hauls in return.
An adult copper dragon befriended a djinni after
The kindly copper dragon has grown fond of the
granting the genie freedom. Now the two meet companionship of Humanoids, although he does
yearly to talk and exchange news. not know if he will ever grow accustomed to the brief
nature of their lives. His last association with the
2 Centaur communities in the foothills surrounding
Galadran Company was well over a century ago, and
an adult copper dragon's lair gather yearly to offer it has been some time since any other outsiders have
tribute to the dragon, who settles disputes and dis disturbed the solitude of the dragon's isles.
penses advice for them.
IOO CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 102 ===
(OPPER DRAGON LAIR
1 square = 10 feet
0
.,
Undergrou
Surface
-~ 11. .
Ii I i• r . 1, a,j I . ).
<;),
~ '~II'··
·\ I' lJ,.
0
f,
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON IOI
•
=== PAGE 103 ===
COPPER DRAGON LAIRS Laughing Gas. The dragon chooses a point on the
ground that it can see within 120 feet of it. A cloud
Copper dragons prefer dry uplands, hilltops, or
of pink gas fills a 20-foot-radius sphere centered
mountainous foothills, where they build their lairs
on that point. Each creature in that area that fails
in caves, crags, or tunnels. Although sometimes nat
a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw is incapacitated
ural, the passages and caverns of a copper dragon's
with laughter until the end of its next turn.
lair might be carved out or expanded by the drag
Torpid Energy. The dragon chooses a creature
on's powerful acid breath.
it can see within 120 feet of it. If the target fails
Copper dragon burrows are often sinuous and
a DC 15 Constitution saving throw, its speed is
winding, featuring twists, turns, and dead ends.
halved, and it can't use reactions or bonus actions
Blank walls in the lair can conceal cunning hidden
until the end of its next turn.
passages or might be stone or clay thin enough for
the dragon to burst through them. The narrowest REGIONAL EFFECTS
tunnels in a copper dragon's lair are just barely wide Either of these effects might appear in the area around
enough to accommodate the dragon's body, and a copper dragon's lair, in addition to or instead of the
they typically loop around and reconnect with them effects described in the Monster Manual:
selves so the dragon can double back without having
Distant Melodies. The ethereal music of wood
to reverse direction.
winds and bells can be heard carried on the wind
COPPER DRAGON LAIR FEATURES within 1 mile of the dragon's lair.
The copper dragon lair shown in map 5.6 is a net Starlit Stones. Standing stones are common on
work of tunnels and large chambers dug beneath hilltops within 1 mile of the dragon's lair. The
dry, rocky hills. The dragon's acid breath has left stones shed dim light in a 10-foot radius at night.
the surface of the stone here with a smooth, melted (If the dragon dies, the stones remain, but they no
appearance. longer shed light.)
The lair has the following features:
COPPER DRAGON TREASURES
Concealed Entrances. Four sloping tunnels emerge
Copper dragons love burnished metals, particularly
onto the surface among the hills, concealed by
those with red and yellow tones, along with gleam
brush and tumbled stone. These openings allow
ing gemstones of all kinds and colors. They also like
the dragon to enter and depart the lair via multi
fine art objects, ranging from tapestries and woven
ple routes. Additionally, the sunken areas shown
rugs to paintings, sculptures, and ornate carvings.
on the surface map correspond to areas where
Copper dragons also collect trophies and keep
the dragon can burst through the ceiling to reach
sakes of their best tricks and triumphs. These range
the surface.
from the crowns, armor, and weapons of long-dead
Secret Doors. Concealed passages connect a num
foes to portraits, personal items, and oddities such
ber of the tunnels and chambers of the lair. Their
as a single ancient coin or an arcane clockwork.
secret doors are magical in nature, with the stone
at a passage junction reshaping itself at the drag
COPPER DRAGON ART OBJECTS
on's command to open a passage or close it again
d8 Object
(similar to the effect of a stone shape spell). When
ever a creature with an Intelligence of 3 or higher A jeweled cloak pin bearing the symbol of an an
comes within 10 feet of one of these secret doors, cient secret society
the dragon becomes aware of that creature's 2 A smooth piece of amber with what appears to be a
presence and location. Each secret door radiates
tiny sprite frozen inside it
an aura of transmutation magic but is otherwise
3 A metal egg that unfolds into a lotus-like flower
indistinguishable from solid stone.
4 A harp that plays by itself on command
Hoard Chamber. At the bottom of the underground
map, a chamber hidden beyond two secret pas- 5 A six-foot-tall mirror of silvered glass in a precious
. sages and carved out beneath a low hill contains frame carved with the shapes of coiling dragons
the bulk of the dragon's hoard. The dragon often 6 A complex puzzle box made of rare woods and in
sleeps in the adjoining chamber, acting as a final
laid with stone
line of defense against intruders.
7 The figurehead of a ship, carved in rare woods and
ADDITIONAL LAIR ACTIONS set with gemstones-and bearing the likeness of
At your discretion, a legendary (adult or ancient) the copper dragon's head
...
copper dragon can use one or both of the following 8 A complex astrological clock, with tiny gemstones
additional lair actions while in its lair:
marking out stars and constellations
102 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 104 ===
. CRYSTAL DRAGONS CRYSTAL DRAGON ADVENTURES
' The Crystal Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
suggestions for stories and adventures involving
5-f-avli&it ic; M~ac;vve.J in ~Mofionc; vath~v crystal dragons.
than ranfif ab/~ vnitc;. A-lthov&i a1c;tal
CRYSTAL DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
dvaB?nc; wovld av~~ that ~Mofionc; d8 Adventure Hook
A towering palace of ice and quartz that was once
ae,,fva/11 av~ ranfifable- vnitc;, c;o I don't
the abode of an ancient crystal dragon is found de
v~a/11 k.Ytow what M1 point ic;.
serted, with no clue as to whether its master will re
-Piz.ban turn or whether some other creature has claimed it.
2 Prismatic shards rain from the sky in a beautiful but
dangerous display. Rumors quickly spread that a
Use the tables, map, and other information in this
crystal dragon is responsible.
section to craft unique encounters with crystal drag
3 A crystal dragon invites the greatest bards and
ons. Crystal dragon stat blocks appear in chapter 6.
philosophers to partake in "the Great Dialogue" in
CREATING A CRYSTAL DRAGON the dragon's mountaintop lair. But only the dragon
knows that the Great Dialogue has no end, and no
Use the Crystal Dragon Personality Traits and Crys
one can leave the lair once it has begun.
tal Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal of
distinctive crystal dragon characters. 4 A crystal dragon intent on exploring a new world of
the Material Plane has acquired a magic ship for the
CRYSTAL DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS journey and now just needs a brave crew.
d8 Trait 5 A crystal dragon who has guarded a mountain pass
If you're not a thief or a frost giant, let's talk! for decades unexpectedly retires to the Elemental
2 Are you comfortable? Can I tell your future for you? Plane of Air. Monstrous forces immediately move
Just let me know what I can do for you, okay? into the area-and might take control of the pass
3 Jokes are as valuable as any gemstone and more fun unless the dragon can be convinced to return.
to share. 6 A royal heir goes missing while secretly visiting a
4 My empathy is a bottomless well. I can't help but crystal dragon. The heir's family, the heir's friends,
lose myself in the emotions of others. and the dragon all want to find the heir, but no fac
tion trusts the others.
5 The stars have much to tell us, and folk need me to
interpret what the stars say. 7 A crystal dragon seeks bold adventurers to steal an
egg from an ancient white dragon who is infamous
6 All play and no work-those are the words I live by.
for abject cruelty and utter remorselessness.
7 I am always the first to offer a compliment.
8 A crystal dragon has ripped open holes to the Ele
8 Get off my snowfield, you immature bipeds! When I
mental Planes of Air and Water, creating flash glaci
was a wyrmling, people respected their elders!
ation that encroaches upon inhabited lands.
CRYSTAL DRAGON IDEALS
SARYNDALACHLOTHTOR
d6 Ideal
The adult crystal dragon Saryndalaghlothtor is known
Exploration. Yesterday is already known. Today is for as "Lady Gemcloak" and sometimes "the Axemother,"
something new. (Chaotic) thanks to her association with a dwarf clan dwelling in
the northern part of FaerOn. She lives closer to civiliza
2 Empathy. It's a gift to share in another's joy, even if
tion than crystal dragons typically do, which delights
sometimes you must bear their pain, too. (Good)
her because of the close friendships she has formed,
3 Hospitality. We all live beautiful lives-it would be a but also annoys her as she is forced to deal with hostile
fools who mistake her for an evil white dragon.
shame not to share our lives with others. (Neutral)
Having earned the enmity of the ancient red dragon
4 Determinism. Our destinies may already be written, Klauth, Lady Gemcloak is exploring the possibility of
but the way we achieve them still matters. (Any) establishing close ties between her dwarf allies and a
group of azers on the Elemental Plane of Fire. In the
5 Fun and Games. Play is learning, but without the
meantime, she's trying to protect her dwarf allies from
boredom. (Chaotic)
the schemes of a hostile mining cartel.
6 Control. Everyone is welcome, as long as they follow
my rules. (Lawful)
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 103
=== PAGE 105 ===
CONNECTED CREATURES ADULT CRYSTAL DRAGON CONNECTIONS
Crystal dragons are among the most social and hos
d8 Connected Creatures
pitable of dragons. They are equal parts mysterious,
An adult crystal dragon convinces a druid to cast
contemplative, and mischievous, making it difficult
the awaken spell on creatures around the dragon's
to know what to expect of them.
lair, so the dragon will never want for conversation.
CRYSTAL DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS 2 A family of yetis seized an adult crystal dragon's lair
and hoard, and the dragon seeks help to drive the
d6 Connected Creatures
yetis out.
A crystal dragon wyrmling rides a sled pulled by a
3 An adult crystal dragon and an elf archmage have
trained pack of wolves and frets about outgrowing
been friends for centuries and often go stargazing
this favorite pastime.
together on the peaks of their favorite mountains,
