slashing from nonmagical attacks ••
Damage Immunities cold, necrotic, poison, psychic
,,,,
,,,
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone
1~
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft.,
passive Perception 26
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft. -
Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +6
Deflection. The shard's AC includes its Intelligence modifier.
Incorporeal Movement. The shard can move through creatures
and objects as if they were difficult terrain. If it ends its turn
inside an object, it takes 5 (ldl0) force damage.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the shard fails a saving throw,
it can choose to succeed instead.
Rejuvenation. When it drops to 0 hit points, the shard disap
pears and leaves a Tiny cracked gemstone in its space. The
gemstone matches the kind of gem dragon it was in life and
has AC 20, 15 hit points, and immunity to all damage except • Each of the creature's attacks deals an extra ld8 force dam-
force. Unless the gemstone is destroyed, after ld20 days, the age on a hit.
gemstone dissipates and the shard re-forms, regaining all its • The creature gains resistance to psychic damage.
hit points and appearing in the place the gemstone once occu
Psychic Crush (Recharge 5-6). The shard unleashes a pulse
pied or in the nearest unoccupied space.
of psychic power. Each creature of the shard's choice in a
Unusual Nature. The shard doesn't require air, food, GO-foot-radius sphere centered on it must make a DC 20 In
drink, or sleep. telligence saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes
55 (l0dl0) psychic damage and is stunned until the end of its
ACTIONS next turn. On a successful save, the creature takes half as much
Multiattack. The shard makes two Telekinetic Rend attacks. damage and isn't stunned.
Telekinetic Rend. Me lee or Ranged Spell Attack: + 12 to hit, Spellcasting (Psionics). The shard casts one of the following
reach 10 ft. or range 120 ft., one target. Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
force damage. the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 20):
Inhabit Object. The shard disappears as it pours its psychic At will: detect thoughts, invisibility, telekinesis
essence into a Medium or smaller nonsentient object it can see
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
within 30 feet of it, magically possessing it. The object uses the
shard's AC, and any damage dealt to the object applies to the The shard can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op
shard's hit points. The shard inhabits the object until it uses tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a
an action to leave; until it is turned; until it is reduced to 0 hit time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The shard
points; or until an effect that ends possession, such as a dispel regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
evil and good spell, is used on it. When it leaves the object, it
Rend. The shard makes one Telekinetic Rend attack.
reappears in the nearest unoccupied space.
Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). The shard uses Spellcasting.
While inhabited, the object becomes a magic item if it wasn't
Commanding Thought (Costs 2 Actions). The shard targets a
already, and a Tiny cracked gemstone matching the kind of gem
creature it can see within 30 feet of it. The target must suc
dragon the shard was in life appears somewhere on the object. ceed on a DC 20 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed until
The shard can cause the object to fly using the shard's own fly the end of its next turn. While charmed in this way, the target
ing speed, use its senses, speak verbally or telepathically, cast becomes the shard's puppet, acting and moving in accor
spells, and use its legendary actions. dance with its telepathic commands. While under the shard's
If a creature wears or carries the inhabited object, the shard control, the target can take only the Attack (shard chooses
can grant the creature the following benefits: the target) or Dash action on its turn.
CHAPTER 6 J BESTIARY 181
=== PAGE 183 ===
What to i;a~ abovt the- dva5°nblood
ooz&? I c..ovld c..oMMe-nt on the- bad blood
be-1we-e-n M_e- and TiaMat. I Mi&1t o~e-vve
that ,ti; ae-atov ovi&nall~ inte-nde-d a
blood i;avt;af? vwpe-. Bvt pe-vhapt; I t;hall
I ,,
i;iMpl~ i;a~, (< Yov ooz&, ~ov ot;e-.
-fizban
DRAG0NBL00D OOZE
Large Ooze, Unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 68 (8d10 + 24)
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft. "l
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 6 (-2) 17 (+3) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 10 (+0)
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +4
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, poison
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion,
frightened, grappled, prone, restrained
Senses blindsight 120 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 14
Languages understands Draconic and the languages of its
creator but can't speak
Challenge S (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Amorphous. The ooze can move through a space as narrow as 1
inch wide without squeezing.
Spider Climb. The ooze can climb difficult surfaces, includ
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
ACTIONS
DRAG0NBL00D OOZE
Multiattack. The ooze makes two Pseudopod attacks. The
Magic-minded artisans have long incorporated parts ooze can replace one Pseudopod attack with its Slime Breath,
if available.
of dragons' bodies into magic items, crafting dragon
hide into armor and forging weapons from claws Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
and teeth. Alchemists have found beneficial uses for target. Hit: 9 (ldl0 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 14 (4d6) acid
damage. If the target is a Large or smaller creature, it is grap
dragon blood, but ill-advised experiments have also
pled (escape DC 15). Until this grapple ends, the target takes 7
given rise to dragonblood oozes.
(2d6) acid damage at the start of each of its turns.
The congealed blood of a dragon given mobility
Slime Breath (Recharge 6). The ooze expels a spray of its gelat
and hunger, the ooze tries to shape itself into a
inous mass in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must
draconic form. It cannot hold a coherent shape for
make a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the
long and soon collapses into an amorphous heap.
creature takes 22 (4d10) acid damage and is pulled up to 30
Similarly, it tries to manifest a breath weapon but feet straight toward the ooze. On a successful save, the crea
manages only to spew forth part of its own body that ture takes half as much damage and isn't pulled.
it then reels back in.
182 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 184 ===
DRAGONBONE GOLEM
A dragonbone golem is composed of dragon bones
linked together with adamantine wire into the form
of a dragon, animated by drawing on the bones' in
herent magic. Most dragonbone golems are created
by powerful dragons from the bones of vanquished
rivals. Each bone is etched with intricate glyphs
that allow animating power to flow through the
golem's form.
Dragonbone golems' resilience and obedi
ence make them excellent lair guardians for
their dragon creators, and their supernaturally
fearsome presence is a strong deterrent against
intrusion.
DRAGONBONE GOLEM Unusual Nature. The golem doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Large Construct, Unaligned
••
ACTIONS •
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 161 (19dl0 + 57) Multiattack. The golem makes one Pinion attack and two
Speed 40 ft. Rend attacks.
Pinion. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) piercing damage. If the target is a Medium
20 (+5) 10 (+0) 17 (+3) 3 (-4) 11 (+0) 10 (+0)
or smaller creature, it is pinned beneath the bony pinion and
restrained. The golem has two pinions, each of which can
Damage Immunities poison
restrain one target. If a creature is restrained by one of the pin
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
ions, the golem can't attack with it. Any creature restrained by
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
a pinion can free itself at the start of its turn with a successful
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
DC 17 Strength (Athletics) check.
Languages understands Draconic and the languages of its
creator but can't speak Rend. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4 get. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) piercing damage plus 5 (ldl0) ne
crotic damage.
Fear Aura. Each creature of the golem's choice that starts its
Petrifying Breath (Recharge 5-6). The golem emits a 60-foot
turn within 20 feet of the golem must make a DC 15 Wisdom
cone of petrifying gas from its mouth. Each creature in that
saving throw unless the golem is incapacitated. On a failed
area must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or
save, the creature is frightened until the start of its next turn.
take 35 (10d6) poison damage and be restrained as it begins
On a successful save, the creature is immune to this golem's
to turn to stone. The restrained target must repeat the saving
Fear Aura for the next 24 hours.
throw at the end of its next turn. On a successful save, the ef
Magic Resistance. The golem has advantage on saving throws fect ends on the target. On a failed save, the target is petrified.
against spells and other magical effects.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 183
=== PAGE 185 ===
champions are associated with the Inheritors of the
First World (see chapter 3).
Sardior's champions use telekinetic power to
move their foes and even carry themselves through
the air. Their breath weapon, a blast of heat, is be
lieved to be an echo of long-lost Sardior's breath.
DRAGONBORN OF TIAMAT
Champions of the dragon queen are often called
Talons of Tiamat. They work tirelessly to free their
master from her imprisonment in Avernus, and
Tiamat grants these pawns immense strength and
a devastating breath weapon. Champions of Tia
mat are sometimes associated with the Cult of the
Dragon (described in chapter 3).
DRAGONBORN OF BAHAMUT
Medium Humanoid, Typically Lawful Good
Armor Class 18 (half plate, shield)
Hit Points 93 (lld8 + 44)
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 13 (+1) 18 (+4) 12 (+l) 14 (+2) 17 (+3)
DRAGONBORN CHAMPIONS
The connection between dragonborn and their Saving Throws Con +7, Int +4, Wis +S, Cha +6
draconic ancestors manifests in a variety of ways. Skills Athletics +7, Perception +S, Persuasion +6
Condition Immunities frightened
Some dragonborn identify with a particular kind of
Senses passive Perception l S
dragon and attempt to emulate such dragons' atti
languages Common, Draconic
tudes and behavior. Others consider their draconic Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
heritage-chromatic, metallic, or gem-something
like a large extended family. But for dragonborn Legendary Resistance (1/Day). If the dragon born fails a saving
champions, this bond is spiritual as much as bio throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
logical, and they devote themselves to their divine
ACTIONS
ancestor. Dragonborn champions advance the cause
Multiattack. The dragonborn makes three Longsword attacks.
of their dragon god among draconic creatures and
other folk alike. Longsword. Me/ee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar
get. Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) slashing damage, or 9 (ldl0 + 4) slashing
DRAGONBORN OF BAHAMUT damage if used with two hands, plus 13 (3d8) radiant damage.
The dragonborn can cause the sword to flare with bright light,
Often called platinum knights, dragonborn champi and the target must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving
ons of Bahamut might belong to an order that exists throw or be blinded until the start of the dragonborn's next
to protect the world from evil-and especially from turn. The sword can flare in this way only once per turn.
evil dragons. A champion of Bahamut has a distinc Healing Touch (1/Day). The dragonborn touches another
tive pair of platinum wings and a breath weapon creature within 5 feet ofit. The target magically regains 40 hit
suffused with radiant energy. points. In addition, all diseases and poisons affecting the target
are removed.
DRAGONBORN OF SARDIOR
Radiant Breath (Recharge 6). The dragonborn exhales fiery ra
Sardior is said to have died in the destruction of the diance in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make
a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 44 (8dl0) radiant dam
First World. But many believe that Sardior's divine
age on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful
essence survives within every gem dragon. This
one. When the dragon born uses this action, it can choose up
philosophy is central to the teachings of Sardior's
to three creatures in the cone. These creatures take no damage
dragonborn champions, who wield psionic power in from the radiance and instead regain 22 (4dl0) hit points each.
the service of their mysterious cause. Many of these
r84 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 186 ===
DRAGONBORN OF SARDIOR
Medium Humanoid, Typically Neutral
Armor Class 17 (Mental Defense)
Hit Points 75 (10d8 + 30)
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS
14 (+2) 16 (+3) 17 (+3) 18 (+4) 14 (+2)
Saving Throws Con +6, Int +7, Wis +5, Cha +4
Damage Resistances psychic DRAGONBORN OF TIAMAT
Skills Arcana +7, History +7, Perception +5 Medium Humanoid, Typically Chaotic Evil •
Condition Immunities frightened
Senses passive Perception 15
Armor Class 18 (plate)
Languages Common, Draconic
Hit Points 85 (10d8 + 40)
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Speed 30 ft. "
Legendary Resistance (1/Day). If the dragonborn fails a saving
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA ,
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. .
20 (+5) 11 (+0) 18 (+4) 10 (+0) 12 (+l) 16 (+3)
Mental Defense. While the dragonborn is wearing no armor, its
AC includes its Intelligence modifier. Saving Throws Str +8, Con +7, Wis +4, Cha +6 •
Skills Athletics +8, Intimidation +6, Perception +4
ACTIONS Condition Immunities frightened
Multiattack. The dragonborn makes three Mind Blade attacks. Senses passive Perception 14
Languages Common, Draconic
Mind Blade. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
ft. or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld4 + 4) piercing dam
age plus 10 (3d6) psychic damage. Legendary Resistance (1/Day). If the dragon born fails a saving
Heat Breath (Recharge 6). The dragonborn exhales a wave of throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
intense heat in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must
ACTIONS
make a DC 14 Constitution saving throw, taking 27 (6d8) fire
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a success Multiattack. The dragonborn makes two Greataxe attacks.
ful one. Metal objects in that area glow red-hot until the end
Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
of the dragonborn's next turn. Any creature in physical contact
target. Hit: 11 (ldl2 + 5) slashing damage plus 13 (3d8) ne
with a heated object at the start of its turn must make a DC 14
crotic damage.
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes
9 (2d8) fire damage and has disadvantage on attack rolls until Necrotic Breath (Recharge 6). The dragon born exhales shadowy
the start of its next turn. fire in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make
a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature
Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon born casts one of the fol
takes 36 (8d8) necrotic damage and is frightened of the dragon
lowing spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelli
born for l minute. On a successful save, the creature takes half
gence as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 15, +7 to hit with
as much damage and isn't frightened. A frightened creature
spell attacks):
can repeat the saving throw at end of each of its turns, ending
1/day each: Bigby's hand, hypnotic pattern, telekinesis the effect on itself on a success.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 185
=== PAGE 187 ===
Tue- b~t wa~ to ide-nfirJ one- of ~~e,
g-aft-e-vt; ii; if ~ov t;e-e- t;orvte-one- vvnn,~
avovnd wan-ti~ '<L--ook- at rvte-! l'rvt a
P'
dvagn! l'rvt a dvaaaaaagn.
--fizban
DRAGONFLESH GRAFTERS
Dragonflesh grafters practice forbidden rituals and
risky experiments on themselves, modifying their
bodies and minds to emulate the dragons they re
vere. They collect dragon parts-scales, teeth, skin,
flesh, wings, and bones-that they scavenge from
around dragon lairs, take from dragon corpses, or
buy from merchants and adventurers. They stitch
on, implant, or ingest these dragon parts, attempt
ing to incorporate them into their own bodies
and absorb the latent magic that lingers in a dra DRAGONFLESH GRAFTER
conic corpse. Large Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
While most would-be grafters wind up hideously
..
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
scarred or dead, a few survive as wretched horrors. ...
Hit Points 52 (7d10 + 14)
Their minds become twisted by magical malevo
Speed 30 ft.
lence, with only a shadow of their former selves
remaining. In the most extreme cases, the result STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
ing abomination holds no remnant of the person 16 (+3) 11 (+0) 14 (+2) 10 (+0) 10 (+0) 6 (-2)
it once was and is utterly ruled by a dragon's lust
Saving Throws Str +5, Con +4
for treasure.
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Draconic
D RAGONFLESH GRAFTER
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
An ordinary dragonflesh grafter is a hulking fusion
of draconic and bipedal characteristics, standing ACTIONS
between 8 and 12 feet tall. As its original nature
Multiattack. The grafter makes one Claw attack and one Great
wanes, its draconic powers grow, giving it a thick
club attack.
layer of dragon scale armor that covers the grafted
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
areas of its body. A dragonflesh grafter can belch
Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) slashing damage plus 5 (ldl0) poison damage.
forth a gout of corrosive acid in a mockery of
Creatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar
dragon breath.
get. Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
As a universal effect of their experimentation,
grafters become obsessed with treasure. Their Acid Retch (Recharge 5-6). The grafter retches forth a spray of
acidic bile in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must
greed compels them to gather any gold or gems they
make a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 14 (4d6) acid
can. After taking this treasure back to their lairs,
... damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a suc
they gaze for hours on end at their glittering trinkets
cessful one.
and golden baubles.
186 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
I ....Ill
=== PAGE 188 ===
•
. ,
•
•
DRAGONFLESH ABOMINATION
A dragonflesh abomination is the final stage
of a grafter's transformation-a hulking
monster whose corrupted brain is ablaze
with desire for treasure. Its abhorrent trans
formation erases the last vestiges of its pre
vious life. It sprouts a tail and clumsy wings
and grows to enormous size, barely retain
ing a bipedal shape. Its stomach chums with
acid, causing noxious fumes to waft from its
mouth and providing it with a caustic breath
weapon. Its body is in a constant state of
growth and change, allowing it to quickly
heal from its wounds.
These creatures are most often found in
abandoned dragon lairs, temples to Tiamat, or other
sites associated with the dragons they love.
DRAGONFLESH ABOMINATION Regeneration. The abomination regains 10 hit points at the
start of its turns if it has at least l hit point.
Huge Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
ACTIONS
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 66 (7dl2 + 21) Multiattack. The abomination makes three attacks using Claw,
Speed 30 ft. fly 40 ft. Acidic Spit, or a combination of them. It can replace one of the
attacks with a Tail attack.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
18 (+4) 14 (+2) 17 (+3) 5 (-3) 12 (+l) 6 (-2)
Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) slashing damage plus 5 (ldl0) poison damage.
Saving Throws Str +7, Con +6 Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned Hit: 10 (ldl2 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a crea
Senses passive Perception 11 ture, it must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be
Languages understands Common and Draconic but can't knocked prone.
speak
Acidic Spit. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 60 ft., one
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
target. Hit: 10 (3d6) acid damage.
Cloying Miasma. The abomination is surrounded by a noxious Acid Belch (Recharge 5-6). The abomination belches forth a
stench. At the start of the abomination's turn, any creature cloud of acidic gas in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area
within 5 feet ofit must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution sav must make a DC 14 Constitution saving throw, taking 28 (8d6)
ing throw or be poisoned until the start of the abomination's acid damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
next turn. successful one.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 187
.l
=== PAGE 189 ===
DRAGON FOLLOWERS
Dragons boast many minions, students, employees,
acolytes, and thralls. Dragon followers are those
servitors whose devotion to a dragon approaches
fanatical reverence and who receive magical power
from the dragon in return.
Dragon followers might serve and revere any kind
of dragon, and their behavior and beliefs reflect the
ethos of the dragon they follow. Many dragon fol
lowers have personal stories of benevolent dragons
sharing great knowledge, protecting their towns,
or sparing their lives during some foolhardy adven
ture. Other followers seek to uncover the mysteries
of draconic nature and live a life worthy of their
dragon's reward, and they dream of a world where
dragons can live among them as their rulers.
DRAGON BLESSED .,i •• '
Medium Humanoid, Any Alignment .,
Dragon blessed are the acolytes of dragons, whom
they revere as gods. They wield magic to heal Armor Class 14 (scale mail)
and support those who have earned their dragon Hit Points 75 (10d8 + 30)
Speed 30 ft.
masters' favor-and scourge those who incur the
dragons' wrath. Dragon blessed view their lives and
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
magical abilities as gifts bestowed by their dragon,
12 (+1) 10 (+0) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 17 (+3) 10 (+0)
and they give life energy to save those they deem im
portant to their masters' work. Saving Throws Con +6, Wis +6
Skills Medicine +6, Religion +S
DRAGON CHOSEN Condition Immunities frightened
Senses passive Perception 13
Dragon chosen are mighty warriors who offer their Languages Common, Draconic, and any two languages
bodies as vessels for a dragon's might. They serve Challenge S (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
as enforcers of their masters' will; they often ac
company dragon speakers-and are quick to defend ACTIONS
them if they sense any ill intent. Dragon chosen are
Multiattack. The blessed makes two Mace or Radiant
skilled in close combat, using two weapons to tear
Bolt attacks.
at their foes.
Mace. Me/ee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach S ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) bludgeoning damage plus 18 (4d8) radi-
DRAGON SPEAKER
ant damage.
Dragon speakers are charismatic and persuasive
Radiant Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +6 to hit, range 120 ft., one
orators who serve as a dragon's ambassadors target. Hit: 22 (Sd8) radiant damage, and the blessed regains 5
among other folk. Dragon speakers have loud and (ldl0) hit points.
authoritative voices, which they use to gain valuable
Spellcasting. The blessed casts one of the following spells, us
resources, diplomatic connections, and donations of
ing Wisdom as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 14):
treasure and magic for their dragons-as well as to
At will: light, thaumaturgy
weave magic both subtle and thundering. They use
1/day each: enhance ability,Jlame strike, mass cure wounds, reviv
...
their commanding presence to instill awe and fear ify, tongues
into the hearts of friends and foes alike.
188 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 190 ===
DRAGON SPEAKER
Small Humanoid, Any Alignment
Medium Humanoid, Any Alignment Armor Class 13 (leather armor)
Hit Points 36 (8d6 + 8)
Speed 30 ft.
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 45 (7d8 + 14)
Speed 30 ft. STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
10 (+0) 14 (+2) 12 (+l) 13 (+l) 11 (+0) 17 (+3)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 18 (+4) 14 (+2) 10 (+0) 13 (+l) 14 (+2) Saving Throws Dex +4, Cha +5
Skills Persuasion +5, Religion +3
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened
Saving Throws Str +6, Dex +6, Con +4
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Skills Athletics +6, Perception +3
Languages Common, Draconic, and any two languages
Condition Immunities frightened
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2 ACTIONS
Multiattack. The speaker makes two Thunder Bolt attacks.
ACTIONS
Thunder Bolt. Melee or Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5
Multiattack. The chosen makes one Handaxe attack and two ft. or range 60 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (3d8) thunder damage,
Shortsword attacks. and the target is pushed horizontally up to 10 feet away from
Handaxe. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. the speaker.
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) slashing damage. Spellcasting. The speaker casts one of the following spells, us
Hit or Miss: The handaxe magically returns to the chosen's ing Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 13):
hand immediately after a ranged attack.
At will: dancing lights
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 1/day each: calm emotions, charm person, command, compre
target. Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) piercing damage. hend languages
REACTION REACTIONS
Biting Rebuke. Immediately after the chosen takes damage Disarming Words (3/Day). When a creature the speaker can see
from a creature within 5 feet of it, it can make a Shortsword within 60 feet of it makes a damage roll, the speaker can roll a
attack with advantage against that creature. d6 and subtract the number rolled from that damage roll.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 189
=== PAGE 191 ===
So,v1e- dva~n~ c..on~ide-v- it an honov- to
be-av- a vvovfh~ v-ide-v- into ba-ttle-. othe-v-~
fnd ,t de-Me-ani~ and vie-vv dva~nn~I~,
~'fl'
vvilli~~~ to ~e-vve- a~ ,v1ovnt~ a~ a
of the-iv- de-ba~e-Me-nt.
-fizban
DRAGONNEL
Dragonnels are distantly related to chromatic, gem,
and metallic dragons and resemble them in basic
form. Intelligent enough to understand speech but
incapable of speaking themselves, they are willful DRAGONNEL
creatures motivated by the desire for food and en Large Dragon, Typically Neutral
tertainment. In the wild, they are picky eaters with
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
mercurial moods, inclined to toy with their prey be
Hit Points 58 (9dl0 + 9)
fore going in for the kill.
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
In some regions, dragonnels are raised from eggs
to be used as aerial mounts. These domesticated STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
dragonnels are loyal to the point of being overly pro 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 12 (+l) 8 (-1) 13 (+l) 10 (0)
tective of their riders. However, efforts to break wild
Skills Perception +3
dragonnels to the saddle are perilous, as these crea
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., cJ,
tures often feign compliance before throwing their
passive Perception 13
would-be riders from great heights. Languages understands Draconic and Common but can't speak
A dragonnel is an agile mount and naturally in Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
clined to flyby tactics, swooping in to make attacks
with its beak and claws before flying out of reach. Flyby. The dragonnel doesn't provoke an opportunity attack
when it flies out of an enemy's reach.
DRACONNEL STEEDS ACTIONS
With the DM's permission, a paladin can summon a
Multiattack. The dragonnel makes two Rend attacks.
spirit in the form of a dragonnel using the.find greater
steed spell, which appears in Xanathar's Guide to Rend. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 4
Everything. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage.
190 CHAPTER 6 j BESTIARY
J
=== PAGE 192 ===
• •
DRAGON TURTLES
Dragon turtles are mighty creatures whose inherent land-and indeed, legends suggest that many unwit
magic is intimately linked with the oceans of the ting sailors wrecked at sea have mistaken slumber
Material Plane. The dragon turtle presented in the ing dragon turtles for solid ground. Ancient dragon
Monster Manual is a typical adult, at least a century turtles might sleep for years or decades while
old and boasting a valuable hoard. You can use floating along the surface of the ocean, enjoying the
the stat blocks in this section for older or younger warmth of the sun and letting vegetation take root
dragon turtles. In addition, chapter 5 includes lair on their shells.
actions and regional effects that can be used for An angry ancient dragon turtle is terrible to be
adult or ancient dragon turtles. hold, radiating heat from the shell to boil the sur
An ancient dragon turtle is a mythic creature rounding water-and any creatures in it. And even if
akin to a greatwyrm, combining the power of mul an enemy wears down the dragon turtle's defenses,
tiple echoes from across the worlds of the Material magical storms manifest to shield the dragon turtle
Plane. Such a creature can be as large as an is- and strike at foes.
ANCIENT DRAGON TuRTLE Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
•
Hit: 18 (2d8 + 9) slashing damage.
Gargantuan Dragon, Typically Neutral
..
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. •
Armor Class 22 (natural armor) Hit: 20 (2dl0 + 9) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a crea
Hit Points 409 (2ld20 + 189) ture, it must succeed on a DC 24 Strength saving throw or be
Speed 30 ft., swim 60 ft. knocked prone. •
Steam Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon turtle exhales steam
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
in a 90-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC
28 (+9) 12 (+l) 29 (+9) 14 (+2) 19 (+4) 15 (+2)
24 Constitution saving throw, taking 67 (15d8) fire damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. Being
Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +16, Wis +11
underwater doesn't grant resistance against this damage.
Skills Perception +11
•
Damage Immunities cold, fire
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 21 The dragon turtle can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
Languages Aquan, Draconic the options below. Only one legendary action option can be
Challenge 24 (62,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7 used at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn.
The dragon turtle regains spent legendary actions at the start
Amphibious. The dragon turtle can breathe air and water. of its turn.
Blessing oft he Sea (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If Attack. The dragon turtle makes one Claw or Tail attack.
the dragon turtle would be reduced to O hit points, its current Move. The dragon turtle moves up to its speed. If the dragon
hit point total instead resets to 350 hit points, and it recharges turtle is swimming, this movement doesn't provoke opportu
its Steam Breath. Additionally, the dragon turtle can now use nity attacks.
the options in the "Mythic Actions" section for l hour. Award a Boiling Aura (Costs 3 Actions). The dragon turtle radiates in
party an additional 62,000 XP (124,000 XP total) for defeating tense heat. Until the start of the dragon turtle's next turn,
the dragon turtle after its Blessing of the Sea activates. whenever a creature starts its turn within 20 feet of the
dragon turtle, that creature must succeed on a DC 24 Con
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon turtle fails a saving stitution saving throw or take 40 (9d8) fire damage. Being
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. underwater doesn't grant resistance against this damage.
Unusual Nature. The dragon turtle doesn't require
MYTHIC ACTIONS
food or drink.
If the dragon turtle's Blessing of the Sea trait has activated in
ACTIONS the last hour, it can use the options below as legendary actions.
