Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Tail. The dragon makes one Tail attack.
Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon uses Spellcasting.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 2II
=== PAGE 213 ===
LAIR ACTIONS
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the
dragon can take one of the following lair actions; throw or have disadvantage on ability checks until
the dragon can't take the same lair action two initiative count 20 on the following round.
rounds in a row:
REGIONAL EFFECTS
Banish into Dream. The dragon targets a creature The region surrounding a legendary moonstone
it can see within 120 feet of it and attempts to dragon's lair is altered by the dragon's magic, creat
send that creature to a dream plane. The target ing one or more of the following effects:
must succeed on a DC 15 Charisma saving throw
Dream Communication. Whenever a creature that
or be banished to a harmless demiplane until ini
can understand a language sleeps or enters a state
tiative count 20 on the next round. While there
of trance or reverie within 6 miles of the dragon's
the target is stunned. When the effect ends, th;
lair, the dragon can establish telepathic contact
target reappears in the space it left or in the near
with that creature and converse with it in its
est unoccupied space.
dreams. The creature remembers its conversation
Compulsive Dance. The dragon targets a creature
with the dragon upon waking.
it can see in its lair, and a merry waltz begins to
Planar Transition. The veil between planes is
play that only the target can hear. The target must
thinned near a moonstone dragon's lair. Various
succeed on a DC 15 Intelligence saving throw or
portals link the Material Plane, the Feywild, and
dance until initiative count 20 on the following
the Border Ethereal within 6 miles of the lair.
round. The dancing creature is incapacitated and
Creatures can pass through a portal in either di
must use all its movement to dance.
rection by spending 5 feet of movement.
Disorienting Visions. Disorienting illusory images
flit through the dragon's lair. Each creature in If the dragon dies, any portals near the lair close
the lair must succeed on a DC 20 Wisdom saving immediately.
ADULT MOONSTONE D RAGON Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (ld8 + 5) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a crea
Huge Dragon, Typically Neutral
ture, it must succeed on a DC 18 Strength saving throw or be
'\+;? •. • knocked prone.
Armor Class 19 (natural armor) ~ ... t ...·
Hit Points 195 (17dl2 + 85) - r . ,. ·11t . Breath Weapon (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 4' • ' " ~1 """"t..'~ I following breath weapons:
Dream Breath. The dragon exhales mist in a 90-foot cone. Each
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
creature in that area must succeed on a DC 18 Constitution
20 (+5) 18 (+4) 20 (+5) 22 (+6) 20 (+5) 23 (+6)
saving throw or fall unconscious for 10 minutes. This effect
ends for a creature if the creature takes damage or someone
Saving Throws Int +11, Wis +10, Cha +11
uses an action to wake it.
Skills Perception + l 0, Persuasion +1 1, Stealth +9
Moonlight Breath. The dragon exhales a beam of moonlight in
Condition Immunities charmed
a 90-foot line that is 10 feet wide. Each creature in that area
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 20
must make a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw, taking 49 (9dl0)
Languages Common, Draconic, Elvish, Gnomish, Sylvan
radiant damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
a successful one.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving Spellcasting. The dragon casts one of the following spells,
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 19):
ACTIONS At will: faerie fire
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two 1/day each: calm emotions, invisibility, revivify
Claw attacks.
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
get. Hit: 16 (2dl0 + 5) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) radi
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
ant damage.
at one time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage.
Tail. The dragon makes one Tail attack.
Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon uses Spellcasting.
212 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
I
=== PAGE 214 ===
YOUNG MOONSTONE D RAGON
Large Dragon, Typically Neutral
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 144 (17dl0 + 51)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
STR DEX CON INT
18 (+4) 16 (+3) 17 (+3) 18 (+4)
. ,.
Saving Throws Con +6, Int +7, Wis +6, Cha +7 MOONSTONE DRAGON WYRMLING
Skills Perception +6, Persuasion +7, Stealth +6
Medium Dragon, Typically Neutral
Condition Immunities charmed
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Languages Common, Draconic, Sylvan
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12)
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus + 3
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
ACTIONS STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 17 (+3)
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Saving Throws Int +S, Wis +4, Cha +5
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar Skills Perception +4, Persuasion +5, Stealth +4
get. Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) piercing damage plus 5 (ldlO) radi Condition Immunities charmed
ant damage. Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Draconic
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach S ft., one target.
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Breath Weapon (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
following breath weapons: ACTIONS
Dream Breath. The dragon exhales mist in a 90-foot cone. Each Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
creature in that area must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) piercing damage plus 3 (ld6) radiant damage.
saving throw or fall unconscious for 10 minutes. This effect
Breath Weapon (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
ends for a creature if the creature takes damage or someone
following breath weapons:
uses an action to wake it.
Moonlight Breath. The dragon exhales a beam of moonlight in Dream Breath. The dragon exhales mist in a 90-foot cone. Each
a GO-foot line that is S feet wide. Each creature in that area creature in that area must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution
must make a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw, taking 38 (7dl0) saving throw or fall unconscious for 10 minutes. This effect
radiant damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on ends for a creature if the creature takes damage or someone
a successful one. uses an action to wake it.
Moonlight Breath. The dragon exhales a beam of moonlight in
Spellcasting. The dragon casts one of the following spells,
a 30-foot line that is S feet wide. Each creature in that area
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
must make a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 14 (4d6)
spellcasting ability (spell save DC l 5):
radiant damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
l /day each: calm emotions, faerie fire a successful one.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 213
=== PAGE 215 ===
SAPPHIRE DRAGONS ART OF WAR
The thunderous clash of conflict is part of the very The warlike sapphire dragons devise strategies and
nature of sapphire dragons. Militant and territorial, ambushes based on their ability to maneuver under
they defend their lairs fiercely, ambushing intruders ground. A sapphire dragon often refrains from strik
and plotting assaults against their rivals. The sonic ing immediately, preferring to assess intruders first
pulse of their breath weapon sows weakness, leav in order to devise the most advantageous approach
ing the victims unable to fight back. to dealing with them.
Sapphire dragons watch for signs of Aberrations
LUMINOUS BLUE
and other creatures corrupted by the Far Realm.
Sapphire dragons' scales and wing membranes They frequently ally with emerald dragons, drawing
show varied shades of blue, ranging from the light on their kin's knowledge of occult phenomena to
tones of a spring sky to the rich, crystalline azure of track the influence of the Far Realm. Armed with
sapphire gems and compressed glacial ice. In the that knowledge, sapphire dragons stamp out alien
light, the scales glitter and shine like luminous star influence before it spreads.
bursts. The dragons' psionic nature is evident in the People who dwell or delve deep beneath the earth
horn and bone structures of their bodies. Their tail can easily find themselves at odds with a sapphire
barbs and horn tips are all separate pieces, but they dragon if they cross into the dragon's territory. But
float in place, held aloft by psychic energy while the sapphire dragons sometimes forge peaceful relation
dragons live. These levitating horns and spines shift ships with rock gnomes or deep gnomes, relying on
slightly with the dragons' moods, bobbing in amuse these folk to help protect the territory surrounding
ment or flaring with anger. their lairs.
ANCIENT SAPPHIRE DRAGON Debilitating Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales a pulse
of high-pitched, nearly inaudible sound in a 90-foot cone. Each
Gargantuan Dragon (Gem), Typically Lawful Neutral
creature in that area must make a DC 23 Constitution saving
throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 55 (l0dl0) thunder
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
damage and is incapacitated until the end of its next turn. On
Hit Points 370 (20d20 + 160)
a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage and
Speed 40 ft., burrow 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
isn't incapacitated.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
27 (+8) 14 (+2) 27 (+8) 21 (+5) 19 (+4) 20 (+5) spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 20):
Saving Throws Dex +9, Con + 15, Wis +1 1, Cha + 12
1/day each: dissonant whispers, hold monster, meld into stone,
Skills History +12, Perception +18, Persuasion +19, Stealth +9
telekinesis, teleport
Damage Resistances lightning, thunder
Condition Immunities frightened
BONUS ACTIONS
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive perception 28
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft. Change Shape. The dragon magically transforms into any crea
Challenge 22 (41,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7 ture that is Medium or Small, while retaining its game statistics
(other than its size). This transformation ends if the dragon is
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving ,.. reduced to 0 hit points or uses a bonus action to end it.
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Psychic Step. The dragon magically teleports to an unoccupied
Spider Climb. The dragon can climb difficult surfaces, includ space it can see within 60 feet of it. .. ..
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check. LEGENDARY ACTIONS
Tunneler. The dragon can burrow through solid rock at half The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
its burrowing speed and can leave a 20-foot-diameter tunnel
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
in its wake.
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
ACTIONS Claw. The dragon makes one Claw attack.
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two Psionics (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon uses Psychic Step or ~
Claw attacks. Spellcasting.
Telekinetic Fling (Costs 3 Actions). The dragon chooses one
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack:+ 15 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar Medium or smaller object that isn't being worn or carried
get. Hit: 19 (2d10 + 8) piercing damage plus 11 (2d10) thun that it can see within 60 feet of it, and it magically hurls the
der damage. object at a creature it can see within 60 feet of the object. The
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. target must succeed on a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw or
take 42 (12d6) bludgeoning damage.
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage.
214 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 216 ===
•
•
ADULT SAPPHIRE DRAGON Debilitating Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales a pulse
of high-pitched, nearly inaudible sound in a 60-foot cone. Each
Huge Dragon (Gem), Typically Lawful Neutral
creature in that area must make a DC 19 Constitution saving
throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 44 (8d10) thunder
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
damage and is incapacitated until the end of its next turn. On
Hit Points 225 (18d12 + 108)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft. a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage and
isn't incapacitated.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA Spel/casting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
23 {+6) 14 (+2) 22 {+6) 18 {+4) 17 (+3) 18 {+4) spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 17):
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +11, Wis +8, Cha +9
1/day each: dissonant whispers, hold monster, meld into stone,
Skills History +9, Perception +13, Persuasion +14, Stealth +7
telekinesis
Damage Resistances lightning, thunder
Condition Immunities frightened
BONUS ACTIONS
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive perception 23
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft. Change Shape. The dragon magically transforms into any crea
Challenge 15 {13,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5 ture that is Medium or Small, while retaining its game statistics
(other than its size). This transformation ends if the dragon is
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving reduced to 0 hit points or uses a bonus action to end it.
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Psychic Step. The dragon magically teleports to an unoccupied
Spider Climb. The dragon can climb difficult surfaces, includ space it can see within 60 feet of it.
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check. LEGENDARY ACTIONS
Tunneler. The dragon can burrow through solid rock at half The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
its burrowing speed and can leave a 10-foot-diameter tunnel options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
in its wake. at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
ACTIONS Claw. The dragon makes one Claw attack.
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two Psionics (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon uses Psychic Step or
Claw attacks. Spellcasting.
Telekinetic Fling (Costs 3 Actions). The dragon chooses one
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar
Small or smaller object that isn't being worn or carried that it
get. Hit: 17 (2dl0 + 6) piercing damage plus 5 (ldl0) thun can see within 60 feet of it, and it magically hurls the object
der damage. at a creature it can see within 60 feet of the object. The target
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. must succeed on a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw or take 31
(9d6) bludgeoning damage.
Hit: 10 (ld8 + 6) slashing damage.
CHAPTER 6 J BESTIARY 215
=== PAGE 217 ===
MARTIAL HOARDS A SAPPHIRE DRAGON'S LAIR
Sapphire dragons' favorite prizes are weapons and Sapphire dragons make their homes in extensive
armor, records of military history and tactics, and cave systems. As they grow older, they make in
magic items that protect against psychic damage creasingly complex renovations to their lairs, using
or mental intrusion. The centerpiece of a sapphire their inherent magic and natural tunneling abili
dragon's hoard is usually a cataloged, orderly collec ties to great effect. Eventually, a sapphire dragon's
tion of war gear, which can contain ancient relics of lair is a dizzying honeycomb of hidden passages,
immense power. deceptively thin walls, and secret chambers that
allow the dragon to travel from one end to the other
YOUNG SAPPHIRE DRAGON unseen by intruders. The most secure lairs might
feature no accessible entrances or exits at all, with
the dragon relying on tunneling or shaping stone to
Armor Class 17 (natural armor) come and go.
Hit Points l 57 (15dl 0 + 75)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 20 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
SAPPHIRE DRAGON WYRMLING
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA Medium Dragon (Gem), Typically Lawful Neutral
21 (+5) 14 (+2) 20 (+5) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 16 (+3)
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +9, Wis +6, Cha +7 Hit Points 45 (6d8 + 18)
Skills History +7, Perception +10, Persuasion +11, Stealth +6 Speed 30 ft., burrow 15 ft., climb 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
Damage Resistances lightning, thunder
Condition Immunities frightened STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 20 17 (+3) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 13 (+l) 14 (+2)
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4 Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +5, Wis +3, Cha +4 .
t
Skills History +4, Perception +5, Persuasion +6, Stealth +4
Spider Climb. The dragon can climb difficult surfaces, includ Damage Resistances lightning, thunder
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an Condition Immunities frightened
ability check. Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception l 5
Languages Draconic, telepathy 120 ft.
Tunneler. The dragon can burrow through solid rock at half
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
its burrowing speed and can leave a 10-foot-diameter tunnel
in its wake.
Spider Climb. The dragon can climb difficult surfaces, includ
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ACTIONS
ability check.
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two
Tunneler. The dragon can burrow through solid rock at half
Claw attacks.
its burrowing speed and can leave a 5-foot-diameter tunnel
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar in its wake. "'
get. Hit: 16 (2dl0 + 5) piercing damage plus 4 (ld8) thun '
' •
der damage. ACTIONS
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
Hit: 8 (ld6 + 5) slashing damage. 8 (ldl0 + 3) piercing damage plus 3 (ld6) thunder damage.
Debilitating Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales a pulse Debilitating Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales a pulse
of high-pitched, nearly inaudible sound in a 30-foot cone. Each of high-pitched, nearly inaudible sound in a 15-foot cone. Each
creature in that area must make a DC 17 Constitution saving creature in that area must make a DC 13 Constitution saving
throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 33 (6dl0) thunder throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 22 (4dl0) thunder
damage and is incapacitated until the end of its next turn. On damage and is incapacitated until the end of its next turn. On
a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage and a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage and
isn't incapacitated. isn't incapacitated.
Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
the spellcasting ability (spell save DC l 5): the spellcasting ability:
1/day each: dissonant whispers, hold person, meld into stone 1/day each: alarm, Tenser'sjloating disk
216 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 218 ===
-
• •
..
Sapphin:- cJroigon~ cJon>t o~e,n f/'t a/o~
with followe,y~ of l-olth, bvt one, phroi~e,
~e,e,m~ to di~~ipate- a lot of fe.n~ion
bdwe-e-n the:-m: ccSpicJe,y~? Y~, ple-a~e-!>'
-rizban
Stone Passage. The dragon touches a section of
stone up to 30 feet in any dimension. The dragon
can shape the stone to open or close a passage
through a wall, as long as the wall is less than 10
feet thick.
REGIONAL EFFECTS
The region surrounding a legendary sapphire drag
on's lair is altered by the dragon's magic, creating
one or more of the following effects:
Crystal Profusion. Natural stone within 6 miles
of the lair grows plentiful crystal formations
The challenge rating of a legendary sapphire and veins of sapphire gemstones, particularly
dragon increases by 1 when it's encountered underground.
in its lair. Stony Sight. Natural stone within 6 miles of the lair
is a conduit for the dragon's psionic presence. As
LAIR ACTIONS an action, the dragon can cast the clairvoyance
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the spell, requiring no spell components and targeting
dragon can take one of the following lair actions; any natural stone formation in that region.
the dragon can't take the same lair action two Telepathic Enhancement. The dragon's psionic
rounds in a row: energy enhances the mental powers of other
creatures. Any creature capable of telepathic com
Awesome Thunder. A thunderous detonation of
munication has its telepathy range doubled while
sound that can be heard up to 300 feet away sur
within 1 mile of the lair. This includes creatures
rounds one creature in the lair that the dragon
with innate telepathy and magical telepathy such
can see. That creature must succeed on a DC 15
as the Rary's telepathic bond spell.
Constitution saving throw or take 13 (3d8) thun
Thriving Wildlife. Giant spiders (a sapphire
der damage and be stunned until the end of its
dragon's favorite prey) are attracted to the area
next turn.
within 6 miles of the lair and settle there in
Beguiling Whisper. The dragon telepathically whis
large numbers.
pers to one creature within range of the dragon's
telepathy. The creature must succeed on a DC If the dragon dies, the population of giant spiders in
15 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by the the region returns to normal levels over the course
dragon until initiative count 20 on the next round. of ldlO days. The enhancement of telepathic abil
A creature charmed in this way obeys to the best ities ends immediately. The existing abundance of
of its ability any command the dragon issues that crystals and sapphires remains, but new ones form
isn't directly harmful to the creature. at a normal rate.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 217
=== PAGE 219 ===
SEA SERPENTS
Sea serpents rank alongside dragon turtles as some sailors' corpses floating frozen amid the wreckage
of the most feared predators of the deep and inspire of their ships.
many sailors' worst nightmares. Their strong fins Sea serpents are as fiercely territorial as any other
propel them through the water at great speed. dragons, and they do not take kindly to ships pass
Young sea serpents are agile hunters. They use ing over their domains without permission. Some
reefs and natural camouflage to hide before they can be appeased by offerings of treasure, but most
strike, picking off members of a ship's crew one demand that a ship's crew sacrifice one or more of
by one. Ancient sea serpents grow large enough to their own.
demolish whole ships, then feed at leisure on help Living amid the wreckage of sunken ships or in
less sailors in the water. At any age, a sea serpent deep sea caves, sea serpents collect the cargo of
attacks with terrible bites, a lashing tail, a constrict the craft they sink, amassing great hoards of trade
ing grip, and a frigid breath weapon that can leave goods, sailors' trinkets, and pirates' booty.
~I8 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
•
•
=== PAGE 220 ===
Whe-n a ~e,a ~e-vpe-nt civiv~ it~e-/f
ANCIENT SEA SERPENT
thvov&' the- hv/1 of a ~hip, it~ ~imp/~
Gargantuan Dragon, Typically Neutral
tv~i~ to ae,u,/e,i,-afe, the- molfi~ pvo~~
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 170 (lld20 + 55) Svve-, the- ~hip mitit ~ink, bvt that~
Speed 20 ft., swim 60 ft.
havcJ/~ the- ~e-vpe-nt~ fav/t
STR DEX CON INT WIS
24 (+7) 15 (+2) 20 (+5) 13 (+l) 16 (+3) -rizban
SavingThrowsStr+l2,Con+l0 .•: , "t.J ~•~:.. ·
Skills Perception +8, Stealth +7 ~ ,,i •i!f'~ ~' 4•
Damage Immunities cold " :: W'~-•
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18 ,. · ,..,,. YOUNG SEA SERPENT ;
.
Languages Common, Draconic Huge Dragon, Typically Neutral ,I. )''k,..,. •I I
Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5 .
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Amphibious. The sea serpent can breathe air and water. Hit Points 123 (l3dl2 + 39)
Legendary Resistance (2/Day). If the sea serpent fails a saving Speed 10 ft., swim 40 ft.
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
Siege Monster. The sea serpent deals double damage to objects
19 (+4) 12 (+l) 17 (+3) 11 (+0) 13 (+l) 10 (+0)
and structures.
Saving Throws Str +7, Con +6
ACTIONS Skills Perception +4, Stealth +4 . '
Multiattack. The sea serpent makes one Bite attack and one Damage Immunities cold
Constrict or Tail attack. Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Common, Draconic
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Hit: 20 (2dl2 + 7) piercing damage plus 6 (ldl2) cold damage.
Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 20 ft., one Amphibious. The sea serpent can breathe air and water.
creature. Hit: 29 (4dl0 + 7) bludgeoning damage, and the
Siege Monster. The sea serpent deals double damage to objects
target is grappled (escape DC 20). Until this grapple ends, the
and structures.
target is restrained, and the sea serpent can't constrict an•
other target.
ACTIONS
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 20 ft., one tar• Multiattack. The sea serpent makes one Bite attack and one
get. Hit: 13 (ldl2 + 7) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a Constrict or Tail attack.
creature, it must succeed on a DC 20 Strength saving throw
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
or be pushed up to 30 feet away from the sea serpent and
Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) piercing damage plus 5 (ldl0) cold damage.
knocked prone.
Rime Breath (Recharge 5-6). The sea serpent exhales a GO-foot Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 20 ft., one
creature. Hit: 22 (4d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the target
cone of cold. Each creature in that area must make a DC 18
is Large or smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 15). Until this
Constitution saving throw, taking 49 (9dl0) cold damage on a
grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the sea serpent can't
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
constrict another target.
LEGENDARY ACTIONS Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach l 5 ft., one target.
The sea serpent can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from Hit: 9 (ldl 0 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a crea•
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be ture, it must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be
used at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. pushed up to 20 feet away and knocked prone.
The sea serpent regains spent legendary actions at the start Rime Breath (Recharge 5-6). The sea serpent exhales a 30-foot
of its turn.
cone of cold. Each creature in that area must make a DC 14
Tail. The sea serpent makes one Tail attack. Constitution saving throw, taking 38 (7dl0) cold damage on a
Bite (Costs 2 Actions). The sea serpent makes one Bite attack. failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 219
=== PAGE 221 ===
TOPAZ DRAGONS
Decay and despair are bound up in the nature of tip of the tail. These spines hover above a living
topaz dragons, thanks to the necrotic energy of the topaz dragon's back, dancing and shifting with the
Negative Plane that suffuses them. Their psionic dragon's mood.
power manifests the fundamental entropic principle
that mortal beings and their creations are ultimately EMBODIMENT OF DECAY
doomed to death and decomposition, and the drag While generally not malicious, topaz dragons em
ons' demeanor is typically morbid and curmud body decay. They view destruction as a natural
geonly as a result. means of clearing the way for new creation and
growth, much as a forest fire clears dead wood, re
GLEAMING GOLD
plenishes the soil, and allows the forest to regrow
Upon hatching, topaz dragon wyrmlings' scales are even healthier than before. To this end, topaz drag
dull yellow-orange and have a cloudy or filmy look. ons use their power to reduce crumbling structures
As they age, their scales harden and clarify, becom and diseased plants to dust, clearing the way for
ing translucent and faceted, and ranging from bright new growth and construction.
yellow to rich amber in color. Their bodies are wider Despite being competent swimmers and making
at the haunches, tapering in a wedge shape toward their lairs on seacoasts and in brackish marshes,
the head, and their wings are shaped to propel them topaz dragons hate the water. Unfortunately, their fa
through both air and water. A topaz dragon's psionic vorite food is giant squid, so these dragons have am
power manifests visibly in the gem-like spines that ple opportunity to complain bitterly about being wet
run in a ridge from the crown of the head to the after diving deep into the ocean in search of prey.
ANCIENT TOPAZ DRAGON that area must make a DC 20 Constitution saving throw. On a
failed save, the creature takes 49 (14d6) necrotic damage and
Gargantuan Dragon (Gem), Typically Chaotic Neutral
is weakened until the end of its next turn. A weakened crea
ture has disadvantage on Strength-based ability checks and
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Strength saving throws, and the creature's weapon attacks that
Hit Points 280 (17d20 + 102)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. rely on Strength deal half damage. On a successful save, the
creature takes half as much damage and isn't weakened.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
23 (+6) 12 (+l) 23 (+6) 20 (+5) 19 (+4) 20 (+5) spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 19):
Saving Throws Dex+7, Con +12, Wis +10, Cha +11
1/day each: antilife shell, bane, control water, create or de
Skills Intimidation +17, Perception +16, Stealth +7 , ·,
stroy water
Damage Resistances cold, necrotic
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 26
BONUS ACTIONS
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 20 (25,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +6 Change Shape. The dragon magically transforms into any crea
ture that is Medium or Small, while retaining its game statistics
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe both air and water. (other than its size). This transformation ends if the dragon is
reduced to O hit points or uses a bonus action to end it.
Fabricate (1/Day). The dragon can cast fabricate, requiring
no spell components and using Intelligence as the spellcast Psychic Step. The dragon magically teleports to an unoccupied
ing ability. space it can see within 60 feet of it.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
ACTIONS options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two •
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Claw attacks.
Claw. The dragon makes one Claw attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar
Psionics (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon uses Psychic Step or
get. Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) ne
Spellcasting.
crotic damage.
Essential Reduction (Costs 3 Actions). The dragon targets a
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack:+ 12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. creature or an object not being worn or carried that it can
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage. see within 60 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 19
Constitution saving throw or take 40 (9d8) necrotic damage.
Desiccating Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales yel If this damage reduces the target to O hit points, it crum
lowish necrotic energy in a 90-foot cone. Each creature in bles to dust.
220 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
..
I ...J
=== PAGE 222 ===
Topaz dragons often come into conflict with
bronze dragons when their coastal territories over
lap, and they can nurture an inexplicably intense ha
tred of these metallic dragons. They can also draw
the ire of druids and other nature protectors who
don't understand the dragons' proclivity for destroy
ing large swaths of countryside. Beyond that, topaz
dragons dislike company and grow irritated when
disturbed. But anyone who can endure their abra
sive demeanor, caustic observations, and morbid in
terests can form a lasting bond with a powerful ally.
ENTROPIC HOARDS
Topaz dragons prize information on destruction and
creation, whether abstract or dedicated to practical
applications. They are fascinated by magic that
creates objects from nothing, animates Undead, de
stroys matter, or manipulates negative energy. And
they are particularly intrigued by Undead, some
times keeping them in their hoards as curios.
ADULT TOPAZ DRAGON must make a DC 17 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save,
the creature takes 35 (10d6) necrotic damage and is weakened
Huge Dragon (Gem), Typically Chaotic Neutral
until the end of its next turn. A weakened creature has disad
vantage on Strength-based ability checks and Strength saving
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
throws, and the creature's weapon attacks that rely on Strength
Hit Points 210 (20d12 + 80)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. •, deal half damage. On a successful save, the creature takes half '
as much damage and isn't weakened.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA Spel/casting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
19 (+4) 12 (+1) 19 (+4) 18 (+4) 17 (+3) 18 (+4) spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 17):
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +9, Wis +8, Cha +9 ,, •. .
, 1/ day each: bane, control water, create or destroy water
Skills Intimidation +14, Perception +13, Stealth +6 ' •, "
Damage Resistances cold, necrotic
BONUS ACTIONS
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 23
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft. Change Shape. The dragon magically transforms into any crea
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5 ture that is Medium or Small, while retaining its game statistics
(other than its size). This transformation ends if the dragon is
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe both air and water. reduced to 0 hit points or uses a bonus action to end it.
Fabricate (1/Day). The dragon can cast fabricate, requiring Psychic Step. The dragon magically teleports to an unoccupied
no spell components and using Intelligence as the spellcast space it can see within 60 feet of it.
ing ability.
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks. Claw. The dragon makes one Claw attack.
Psionics (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon uses Psychic Step or
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar
Spellcasting.
get. Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) piercing damage plus 3 (ld6) ne
Essential Reduction (Costs 3 Actions). The dragon targets a
crotic damage.
