creature or an object not being worn or carried that it can
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. see within 60 feet ofit. The target must succeed on a DC 17
Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) slashing damage. Constitution saving throw or take 28 (8d6) necrotic damage.
If this damage reduces the target to 0 hit points, it crum
Desiccating Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales yellow bles to dust.
ish necrotic energy in a GO-foot cone. Each creature in that area
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 221
=== PAGE 223 ===
-
•
• ..
•
•
~ A TOPAZ DRAGON'S LAIR
Topaz dragons dwell where the sea meets the
land, favoring sites where the constant action
of the waves and tides is slowly reducing the
land to gravel. They make their lairs in caves
set into sea cliffs, or beneath salt marshes
where fresh water and sea water mingle,
constantly grappling with their dislike of
water to use flooded tunnels as secure en
trances into their homes. They keep the inte
rior chambers of their lairs meticulously dry.
The challenge rating of a legendary topaz
dragon increases by 1 when it's encoun
tered in its lair.
LAIR ACTIONS
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties),
the dragon can take one of the following lair
actions; the dragon can't take the same lair
action two rounds in a row:
Beguiling Whisper. The dragon telepathi
cally whispers to one creature within range
of the dragon's telepathy. The creature must
succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw
or be charmed by the dragon until initia-
tive count 20 on the next round. A creature
charmed in this way obeys to the best of its
ability any command the dragon issues that isn't
directly harmful to the creature.
Cancellation. The dragon chooses an active spell of
5th level or lower that it's aware of in the lair and
ends the spell.
Negative Energy Infusion. Up to two creatures the first succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving
dragon can see within the lair must each succeed throw or be unable to reduce its levels of exhaus
on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or take 14 tion or regain spent Hit Dice. Creatures resistant
(4d6) necrotic damage. Negative energy then in or immune to necrotic damage are immune to this
fuses the lair until initiative count 20 on the next regional effect.
round. While the infusion lasts, creatures in the Thriving Wildlife. Giant squid are attracted to the
lair other than the dragon can't regain hit points. sea within 6 miles of the lair, migrating and hunt
ing there in large numbers.
REGIONAL EFFECTS
Watery Sight. Water within 6 miles of the lair is a
The region surrounding a legendary topaz dragon's
conduit for the dragon's psionic presence. As an
lair is altered by the dragon's magic, creating one or
action, the dragon can cast the clairvoyance spell,
more of the following effects:
requiring no spell components and targeting any
Crystal Profusion. Natural stone within 6 miles body of water in that region.
of the lair grows plentiful crystal formations
If the dragon dies, the population of giant squid in
and veins of topaz gemstones, particularly
the region returns to normal levels over the course
underground.
of ldlO days. The existing abundance of crystals
Negative Energy. When a creature finishes a long
and topazes remains, but new ones form at a
rest within 6 miles of the lair, the creature must
normal rate.
222 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 224 ===
•
•
·J:;~·-.., .
,, .,. ..
'.,.p, .~--~
,..~.;"
•,,. '
! 'J'.ticz.-u
YOUNG TOPAZ DRAGON
Large Dragon (Gem), Typically Chaotic Neutral
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 127 (17dl0 + 34)
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. TOPAZ DRAGON WYRMLING
Medium Dragon (Gem), Typically Chaotic Neutral
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 12 (+l) 15 (+2) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 16 (+3) Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6)
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +5, Wis +5, Cha +6 Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft.
Skills Intimidation +9, Perception +8, Stealth +4
Damage Resistances cold, necrotic STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18 15 (+2) 12 (+l) 13 (+l) 14 (+2) 13 (+l) 14 (+2)
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3 Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +3, Wis +3, Cha +4
Skills Intimidation +6, Perception +5, Stealth +3
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe both air and water. Damage Resistances cold, necrotic
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15
ACTIONS Languages Draconic, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe both air and water.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar
get. Hit: 14 (2dl0 + 3) piercing damage plus 3 (ld6) ne ACTIONS
crotic damage.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. get. Hit: 7 (ldl0 + 2) piercing damage plus 2 (ld4) ne
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage. crotic damage.
Desiccating Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales yellow Desiccating Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales yellow
ish necrotic energy in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area ish necrotic energy in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area
must make a DC 13 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, must make a DC 11 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save,
the creature takes 28 (8d6) necrotic damage and is weakened the creature takes 21 (6d6) necrotic damage and is weakened
until the end of its next turn. A weakened creature has disad until the end of its next turn. A weakened creature has disad
vantage on Strength-based ability checks and Strength saving vantage on Strength-based ability checks and Strength saving
throws, and the creature's weapon attacks that rely on Strength throws, and the creature's weapon attacks that rely on Strength
deal half damage. On a successful save, the creature takes half deal half damage. On a successful save, the creature takes half
as much damage and isn't weakened. as much damage and isn't weakened.
Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 14): the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 12):
1/day each: bane, create or destroy water 1/day: bane
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 223
=== PAGE 225 ===
CREATURE LISTS CR Creature 0RACONS
8 Hoard mimic Amethyst dragons
The creatures in this chapter
are organized by their challenge 8 Young emerald dragon Aspect of Bahamut
Aspect ofTiamat
rating in the Creatures by Chat- 8 Young moonstone dragon
lenge Rating table. Lists of crea- 8 Young sea serpent Chromatic greatwyrm
tures by type follow that table. Crystal dragons
9 Young amethyst dragon
Deep dragons
CHALLENGE RATINGS 9 Young sapphire dragon Dragonnel
10 Young dragon turtle Dragon turtles
CREATURES BY
11 Adult deep dragon Emerald dragons
CHALLENCE RATINC
11 Dracohydra Gem greatwyrm
CR Creature
11 Dragonbone golem Metallic greatwyrm
1/8 Hoard scarab 12 Adult crystal dragon Moonstone dragons
1/4 Metallic warbler Sapphire dragons
13 Adult topaz dragon
1/2 Draconian foot soldier Sea serpents
14 Adult emerald dragon
1 Deep dragon wyrmling Topaz dragons
14 Ancient sea serpent
2 Crystal dragon wyrmling
15 Adult moonstone dragon ELEMENTALS
2 Draconian mage Animated breath
15 Adult sapphire dragon
2 Dragonnel
16 Adult amethyst dragon
HUMANOIDS
2 Dragon speaker
17 Draconic shard Dragon blessed
2 Egg hunter hatch ling
17 Ghost dragon Dragon born of Bahamut
2 Emerald dragon wyrmling
18 Ancient deep dragon Dragon born of Sardior
2 Moonstone dragon wyrmling
18 Hollow dragon Dragonborn ofTiamat
2 Swarm of hoard scarabs Dragon chosen
19 Ancient crystal dragon
2 Topaz dragon wyrmling Dragon speaker
20 Ancient topaz dragon
3 Draconian infiltrator
21 Ancient emerald dragon MONSTROSITIES
3 Dragon chosen
21 Ancient moonstone dragon Dracohydra
3 Dragonflesh grafter
22 Ancient sapphire dragon Draconian dreadnought
3 Sapphire dragon wyrmling Draconian foot soldier
22 Elder brain dragon
4 Amethyst dragon wyrmling Draconian infiltrator
23 Ancient amethyst dragon
4 Draconian dreadnought Draconian mage
24 Ancient dragon turtle
4 Dragon turtle wyrmling Draconian mastermind ' ...
26 Gem greatwyrm
Dragonflesh abomination
4 Metallic peacekeeper
27 Chromatic greatwyrm Dragonflesh grafter
5 Dragon blessed
28 Metallic greatwyrm Egg hunter adult
5 Dragonblood ooze
30 Aspect of Bahamut Egg hunter hatchling
5 Egg hunter adult
30 Aspect ofTiamat Gem stalker
5 Gem stalker Hoard mimic
5 Young crystal dragon CREATURE TYPES Hoard scarab
5 Young deep dragon Lion drake
ABERRATIONS
6 Animated breath Swarm of hoard scarabs
Elder brain dragon
6 Draconian mastermind
Eyed rake OOZE
6 Dragon born of Sardior Dragonblood ooze
CONSTRUCTS
6 Dragonflesh abomination
Dragonbone golem UNDEAD
7 Dragonborn ofTiamat
Metallic peacekeeper Draconic shard
7 Liondrake
Metallic warbler Ghost dragon
7 Young topaz dragon
Hollow dragon
8 Dragon born of Bahamut
8 Eyed rake
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
l I •
=== PAGE 226 ===
S
traight from the
D ’ M
ragon s outh
Meet Fizban the Fabulous: doddering archmage,
unlikely hero of the War of the Lance, divine
avatar of a dragon-god-and your guide to
the mysteries of dragonkind in the worlds of
Dungeons & Dragons .
In these pages. Fizban reveals the truth of the
First World and introduces the family of gem
dragons-amethyst, crystal, emerald, sapphire,
and topaz.
Players will find a treasure trove of dragon-
themed character options: dragonborn with
ties to specific draconic ancestries, subclasses
for dragon-themed monks and rangers, ..X
supernatural gifts for those who claim the
power of a dying dragon, and more.
Dungeon Masters' can enjoy a rich hoard of
material designed to help bring dragons to life
in dragon-themed encounters, adventures,
and campaigns. The gems within range from
guidance on creating unique and memorable
draconic characters to maps for dragon lairs,
treasures for a dragon's hoard, and monsters
to populate your adventures. Learn everything
there is to know about the most iconic monsters
of D&D through Fizban's expert advice!
For use with the fifth edition
Player's Handbook . Monster Manual,
and Dungeon Master s Guide
&
DunceonsandDracons.com
iL
WIZARDS
