-riz.ban Keen Senses. You have advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks.
The draconic gifts detailed in this section have ECHO OF DRAGONSIGHT
rarities like magic items. The rarity of a draconic Draconic Gift, Very Rare
gift corresponds roughly to the age category of the
You have begun to extend your awareness be
dragon that bestowed it, as shown in the Draconic
yond the single world of the Material Plane that is
Gift Rarity table.
your home.
You can use a more common draconic gift for an
You can cast contact other plane as a ritual. The
older dragon, but exercise caution going in the other
entity you contact is a dragon on another world in
direction. Very rare and legendary draconic gifts
the Material Plane, so its knowledge of your world
can unbalance the game if they're given to low-level
might be limited. Also, this dragon is an echo of the
characters.
dragon who is the source of the gift, which might
affect its attitude and behavior toward you.
DRACONIC GIFT RARITY
Rarity Age Category FRIGHTFUL PRESENCE
Uncommon Wyrmling Draconic Gift, Very Rare
Rare Young Echoes of a dragon's might linger around you, and
you can call on them to inspire fear in those who
Very rare Adult
stand against you.
Legendary Ancient
As a bonus action, you can manifest your fright
ful presence. Each creature of your choice that is
DRACONIC FAMILIAR
within 120 feet of you and aware of you must make
Draconic Gift, Uncommon
a Wisdom saving throw against a DC equal to 8 +
You gain the aid of a draconic familiar, which might
your proficiency bonus + your Charisma modifier. A
be a splinter of the consciousness of a dragon that
creature that fails becomes frightened of you for 1
invested you with power.
minute. The creature can repeat the saving throw
You can cast the find familiar spell as a ritual with
at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on
out using any material components. When you cast
itself on a success.
the spell in this way, your familiar always takes the
Once you use this ability a number of times equal
form of a pseudodragon.
to your proficiency bonus, you can't use it again until
Additionally, when you take the Attack action on
you finish a long rest.
your turn, you can forgo one of your own attacks to
allow your pseudodragon familiar to make one at PSIONIC REACH
tack of its own with its reaction. Draconic Gift, Very Rare
The psionic energy of a gem dragon empowers your
DRACONIC REBIRTH
mind. You gain resistance to psychic damage.
Draconic Gift, Uncommon
In addition, you learn the telekinesis spell. You
You become a dragonborn. You replace the racial
can cast this spell without expending a spell slot.
traits of your original race with the traits of a chro
Once you cast this spell in this way, you can't do so
matic, gem, or metallic dragonborn (detailed in this
again until you finish a long rest. You can also cast
book). The kind of dragonborn you become matches
this spell using spell slots you have of the appro
priate level. The spellcasting ability is Intelligence,
28 CHAPTER 2 I DRAGON MAGIC
=== PAGE 30 ===
Wisdom, or Charisma when you cast the spell with
FEATS AS DRACONIC GIFTS
this gift (choose when you gain the gift).
If your campaign uses the optional feat rules from the
Player's Handbook, your Dungeon Master might give
SCALED TOUGHNESS
you a feat as a variant draconic gift. You gain one feat
Draconic Gift, Legendary
of your or the DM's choice, which is related in some
Your skin toughens, making you resistant to certain way to the draconic power you have acquired. Consider
types of physical harm. You gain resistance to pierc these examples:
ing and slashing damage. • Your heightened senses give you a dragon's aware
ness of your surroundings (Alert or Observant).
TONGUE OF THE DRAGON • Dragon's blood has made you hardy and resilient
Draconic Gift, Uncommon (Durable, Resilient, or Tough).
• Exposure to the primal energy of a dragon's body
You gain some of the majestic presence of a dragon.
has given you a magical affinity for one damage type
Dragon's Speech. You can speak, read, and
(Elemental Adept).
write Draconic. • You are infused with a dragon's charismatic gift for
Dragon's Voice. As a bonus action, you can make inspiration (Inspiring Leader).
your voice audible up to 300 feet away for 1 minute. • You are imbued with a dragon's intellect
Dragon's Wiles. You have advantage on Charisma (Keen Mind).
• The dragon's gift lingers in the form of good
(Persuasion) checks.
luck (Lucky).
• The dragon's inherent magic has transferred to your
own blood (Magic Initiate).
At the DM's discretion, you might also be able to gain
one of the draconic feats described in chapter l as a
draconic gift.
CHAPTER 2 I DRAGON MAGIC 29
=== PAGE 31 ===
IN HIS GUISE AS Fi-tBAN THE FABULOUS, BAHAMUT
HELPS TWO UNLIKELY HEROES ESCAPE THE
WRATH OF THE RED DRAGON PvROS.
=== PAGE 32 ===
DRAGONS IN PLAY
HIS CHAPTER IS INTENDED FOR THE damentally magical biology, and the sheer enormity
Dungeon Master. The ideas and tables of their power.
herein can help inspire you as you prepare
to use dragons in your D&D game, whether DRAGON CHARACTERS
you're building a single climactic encounter The Dungeon Master's Guide includes a series of
or planning a whole campaign around these marvel tables and guidelines designed to help you craft
ous creatures. The material here builds on what's NPCs. This section presents alternatives to those
in the Dungeon Master's Guide and the "Dragons" tables, helping you transform a dragon from a stat
section of the Monster Manual. It's divided into five block and a basic description into a full-fledged char
main sections: acter in your campaign.
In chapter 5 of this book, you'll find additional ta
"Roleplaying Dragons" presents tips and tricks
bles of personality traits and ideals that are custom
for building a dragon character as complex and
ized to various kinds of dragons.
distinctive as any other villain, ally, or mysterious
figure in your campaign. It includes tables to help
DRAGON APPEARANCE
you craft dragon personalities, as well as discus
sions of dragon aging, reproduction, and death; d20 Appearance
dragons' relationship to undeath and religion; and Draconic letters or symbols engraved on promi
draconic shape-shifting and organizations. nent scales
"Followers" explores the relationships between
2 Large scar
dragons and the various creatures that might
3 One eye missing or milky
serve their interests.
"Dragon Encounters" offers suggestions for build 4 Crooked teeth
ing encounters that feature dragons, whether you 5 Notably overweight or underweight
want such an encounter to be the climax of an ad 6 Elongated, sinuous body
venture or an obstacle in a larger narrative.
7 Shortened, stocky body
"Dragon Adventures" looks at the different roles a
8 Coins or gems embedded in hide
dragon can play in an adventure's story.
"Dragon Campaigns" talks about building worlds 9 Sculpted horns or claws
and campaign story arcs that put dragons at the 10 Rings piercing crest or wing edges
forefront of history and at the center of the charac
11 Draped in some semblance of clothing, from a
ters' lives and adventuring ambitions.
stole to a full robe
12 Unusual coloration (for example, a red dragon with
ROLEPLAYING DRAGONS
an orange, brown, or purple cast)
13 Crouched, predatory posture like a stalking cat's
To povfva~ a c.-onvine-i~ hvrvian, one- rviv~t
14 Erect, almost bipedal posture
e-rvibocJ~ ffe;,e;,cJ, ~e-lf ~hn~~, and vijlanu-. 15 Scales covered with painted hand prints of minions,
admirers, or children
To povfva~ a c.-onvine-i~ cJv-a~n, one- rviv~t
16 Necklaces made of bones, horns, claws, or teeth
.,-e;,/ax.
taken from enemies
-fiz.ban
17 Extra horns or spines
18 Elongated, fang-like teeth, or extra rows of teeth
Dragons are complex creatures with varied person 19 Sharpened or serrated scales
alities, goals, priorities, and mannerisms. In that 20 Elemental energy matching the dragon's breath
respect, they're much like mortal folk-but dragons weapon, seeping out between the scales
are also shaped by their specifically draconic char
acteristics, including incredibly long life spans, fun-
