treasures from disparate locales. Although many
from a point on the ground the dragon turtle can
dragon turtles simply lump the elements of their
see within 120 feet of it. Each creature in that area
hoard together into a nest, more inquisitive individu
must make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw,
als take an interest in specific treasures, sometimes
taking 21 (6d6) fire damage on a failed save, or
seeking out surface-world folk to inquire about an
half as much damage on a successful one. Being
object's function or provenance.
underwater doesn't grant creatures resistance to
this damage.
DRAGON TURTLE ART OBJECTS
REGIONAL EFFECTS dlO Object
The region containing a dragon turtle's lair can be An elven coronet, which the dragon turtle wears as
transformed by its presence, creating one or more of
an earring
the following effects:
2 A pipe organ that the dragon turtle refers to as
Diverting Currents. Underwater currents push "Bubbles," which works underwater
unwanted visitors away from the lair. While swim
3 Cast-metal masks painted with the faces of rulers
ming in these currents, each foot of movement
whose names the dragon turtle constantly misre
costs 1 extra foot (2 extra feet in difficult terrain),
members
even if a creature has a swimming speed.
4 A zither fashioned from a conch shell, which the
Elemental Portals. C:revasses on the ocean floor
within 1 mile of the dragon turtle's lair form two dragon turtle insists visitors play before granting
way portals to the Elemental Plane of Water, al them an audience
lowing creatures of elemental water into the world 5 A painted egg decorated with glittering jewels
to dwell nearby.
6 An ornate underwater carriage fashioned from coral
Hot Water. Geothermal vents heat the water within
and seashells, which the dragon turtle pushes back
6 miles of the dragon turtle's lair to 100 degrees
and forth like a toy
Fahrenheit.
7 A sculpture depicting a knight on griffonback,
If the dragon turtle dies, these effects fade over the
whose lance the dragon turtle uses to scrape off
course of ldlO days.
barnacles
8 An urn engraved with a scowling dwarf's face,
AREMAC:
whose expression the dragon turtle mimics comi
Aremag is an adult dragon turtle who lays claim to
the southern reaches of the Sea of Swords in Faerun, cally
extracting tribute from all who enter or leave the Bay of 9 A scepter fashioned to resemble a skeletal arm,
Ch ult. Traders often carry chests of treasure on board
which unnerves the dragon turtle for some inexpli
expressly for this purpose-pirates are more likely
cable reason
to offer captives, launched out in a skiff to feed the
dragon turtle's voracious appetite. 10 An elegant candelabra that the dragon turtle thinks
Aremag's predation has occasionally provoked re is lost, but that is actually wedged into a crack in
prisal from Chult's inhabitants, as attested to by his
their shell
milky-white left eye and missing patch of shell. How
ever, rather than humbling the great dragon turtle,
these injuries have made him more irascible. Those
who meet the dragon turtle are advised to pay what
ever price he asks, and to treat him with the deference
he believes he deserves.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON II3
=== PAGE 115 ===
,
EMERALD DRAGONS
d6 Ideal
5 Inquisitiveness. Even the smallest village contains
myriad stories of love, loss, triumph, and betrayal.
Althov&, e,me,va/cJ cJvaoin~ ave, w,~e, There is always more to learn about people. (Any)
be,~oncJ te-1/i~ the-~ v~va/1~ an~we,v 6 Espionage. Once I get paid for the information I
glean, I don't care what others do with it. (Evil)
't;'~fion~ with ~ome, v'afle, }bbe-v jabbe-v
like-, an~we,v Ii~ w,-th,n ~ov.>' EMERALD DRAGON ADVENTURES
i<n,e,
The Emerald Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
fu~mfinj
suggestions for stories and adventures involving em
-Ptzban erald dragons.
EMERALD DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
Use the tables, map, and other information in this
d8 Adventure Hook
section to craft unique encounters with emerald
An emerald dragon is the only witness to a murder
dragons. Emerald dragon stat blocks appear in
but doesn't want to be found or identified.
chapter 6.
2 An emerald dragon seeks heroes to participate in a
CREATING AN EMERALD DRAGON dramatic reenactment of a legendary battle involv•
Use the Emerald Dragon Personality Traits and Em ing dragon riders.
erald Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal 3 An emerald dragon's assault on a fire giant has
of distinctive emerald dragon characters. attracted the attention of the giant's clan, and now
the dragon seeks aid.
EMERALD DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS
4 Villagers have been going missing, and then are
d8 Trait
found weeks later roaming the forest. They have no
I repeat what others have said back to them to memory of the emerald dragon who charmed them
make sure I have remembered it correctly. for wandering too close to the dragon's lair.
2 I might not like you, but I will endeavor to treat you 5 Giant lizards drawn to the lair of a legendary emer•
with respect, if not kindness. aid dragon are terrorizing a nearby halfling settle•
3 I like to impress visitors by reciting epic poetry. ment. One solution is to get rid of the dragon.
4 The only people I'm interested in are those who 6 An emerald dragon is the headmaster in absentia of
know history and those who make history. a bardic college and must be convinced to defend
5 I like to adopt the personas of characters from leg• the school in a contest against a rival college.
end. 7 An emerald dragon invisibly tails a party of adven•
6 I studiously mimic the mannerisms of my guests. turers, causing trouble for the heroes so the dragon
7 I prefer to get others talking, then fade into the can watch how they respond.
background. Sometimes literally. 8 An emerald dragon has been spying for a villainous
8 I seek out audiences and like to be the center of cabal, ensuring the villains remain one step ahead
attention. of the adventurers.
CONNECTED CREATURES
EMERALD DRAGON IDEALS
Emerald dragons generally go out of their way to
d6 Ideal
avoid interacting with other intelligent creatures.
Seclusion. It's safer if others don't know I'm here However, their interest in history and culture occa
safer for me and safer for them. (Any) sionally gets the better of them, prompting them to
2 Observation. People lie. Histories lie. Even dragons seek some engagement with the folk of the world.
lie. But actions always ring true. (Lawful)
EMERALD DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS
3 Storytelling. There is a magic in the retelling of sto•
d6 Connected Creatures
ries. Each new teller adds a bit of themself to the
spell. (Any) Blood hawks routinely accost an emerald dragon
wyrmling who lairs near the hawks' nest.
4 Nurture. Rearing a child is our best chance to make
sure our own stories are passed on. (Any) 2 An emerald dragon wyrmling is being hunted by a
fire giant's pet hell hound.
114 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 116 ===
d6 Connected Creatures d8 Connected Creatures
3 An emerald dragon wyrmling follows a berserker to 7 An iron golem ferries visitors across the lava moat
observe the berserker's life. The berserker believes surrounding an adult emerald dragon's lair.
the dragon is a spirit companion. 8 An adult emerald dragon spies on the adult red
4 A flattering orog plies an emerald dragon wyrmling dragon who killed the emerald dragon's mate, look
with gems in exchange for information about a set ing for weaknesses.
tlement the wyrmling has been observing.
5 An emerald dragon wyrmling keeps trying to play ANCIENT EMERALD DRAGON CONNECTIONS
with a pair of newly hatched fire snakes. d4 Connected Creatures
6 An emerald dragon wyrmling has been captured by An ancient emerald dragon bargains with a pit fiend
scheming duergar, who plan to use the wyrmling as to buy back the soul of a legendary hero.
bait to lure the wyrmling's parents out of their lair. 2 A group of adult red and silver dragons set aside
their differences to learn wisdom from an ancient
YOUNG EMERALD DRAGON CONNECTIONS emerald dragon.
d6 Connected Creatures 3 Two balors act as jailers for an ancient emerald
A young emerald dragon has befriended a stone gi dragon imprisoned by a long-dead enemy.
ant, who is teaching the dragon giant folklore. 4 An ancient emerald dragon works to summon a
2 A young emerald dragon lairs in abandoned bandit solar to get a firsthand account for a history of the
caverns also occupied by a friendly earth elemental, gods the dragon is compiling.
which hunts for buried coins for the dragon's hoard.
EMERALD DRAGON LAIRS
3 A galeb duhr acts as a door guard to a young emer
ald dragon's lair. Emerald dragons make their lairs in caves and sub
terranean ruins, favoring locations that have been
4 A young emerald dragon invites repeated visits
abandoned-and ideally forgotten-by other crea
from a drow mage who corrects what the dragon
tures. They are most comfortable in extreme heat,
has learned about the history of the elven schism.
so they frequently choose lair sites in the sides of
5 A young emerald dragon attempts to drive off a clan
volcanoes or near geothermal vents.
of cyclopes who have taken up residence in a nearby An emerald dragon's lair is a maze of twisting
cave, attacking the clan's herd of giant goats. tunnels, interconnected caverns, or crumbling ruins
6 An assassin and a young emerald dragon train to designed to disorient intruders. Circuitous routes
gether to master the art of stealth. within the lair provide the dragon with numerous
ADULT EMERALD DRAGON CONNECTIONS RAULOTHIM
Raulothim is an ancient emerald dragon who dwells
d8 Connected Creatures
in an extinct volcano known as the Pit of Stars, on the
An adult emerald dragon wages a constant battle northernmost isle of Ruathym off the Sword Coast of
against deep gnome miners, who scour the tunnels Faerun. Though most emerald dragons are paranoid
by nature, Raulothim became especially so after hav
of the dragon's lair in search of emeralds.
ing witnessed the arrival of planar travelers in Faerun.
2 An adult silver dragon tries to befriend and draw
Fearing that an invasion of his world by interplanar
out a reclusive adult emerald dragon. armies was inevitable, he has spent the past century
collecting magic items that he hopes will enable him to
3 An adult emerald dragon unwillingly serves a fire
survive the coming conflict.
giant tribe holding the dragon's egg hostage.
Raulothim's drive to amass magic and his innate
4 An adult emerald dragon is fascinated by the in mistrust of anyone powerful enough to potentially
trigues of a rakshasa disguised as a human mer threaten him make the dragon a dangerous adversary.
However, he knows the surest way of safeguarding
chant prince.
Faerun against planar invaders is to keep a careful
5 An adult emerald dragon shows an emerald dragon watch on all planar portals-and that to do so, he
wyrmling how to safely observe Humanoids without must rely on allies. Raulothim is therefore open to
being detected. negotiating with adventurers willing to aid in that
task-but only those he is sure he can trust. On more
6 An adult emerald dragon keeps a wary eye on the
than one occasion, doubt has gnawed at Raulothim's
efreet who have built a tower near the dragon's lair, mind, prompting him to preemptively strike against a
and indirectly aids any who oppose the efreet. previously trusted ally.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON II$
=== PAGE 117 ===
,
EMERALD DRAGON LAIR
MAP 5.8
1 square = 10 feet
\\1
'
n6 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 118 ===
ways to evade pursuit, while strategically designed EMERALD DRAGON TREASURES
choke points allow them to harry enemies with
Emerald dragons are unusual among gem dragons
repeated ambushes. Emerald dragons frequently
in their preference for coinage over gemstones when
lay traps and alarms at the entrance points to their
amassing treasure. They are fascinated by the var
lairs, with older (and more paranoid) dragons em
ious designs of coinage and often strive to collect
ploying several layers of such defenses.
rare mintages. Most emerald dragons can precisely
EMERALD DRAGON LAIR FEATURES enumerate the names, amounts, and denominations
The emerald dragon lair shown in map 5.8 is a se of every bit of currency in their hoards.
ries of ancient vaults situated beneath a city built in Emerald dragons also prize cultural artifacts,
the caldera of a dormant volcano. The vaults fell into especially relics with historical significance. They
disuse over a century ago when an upwelling from place great importance on an item's provenance,
the lake at the caldera's center collapsed a portion of which can make it difficult to gauge how they might
the vaults and flooded their halls with boiling water value any particular object. Despite remaining un
and noxious fumes. The stairwell leading up to the moved by the loss of a gold scepter deemed to be a
city was sealed to prevent the fumes from spilling replica, an emerald dragon might become enraged
into the streets above. Decades later, once the volca at the theft of a clay mug known to have been used
no's activity had subsided, the dragon moved in. by a legendary dwarf warlord while on campaign.
The lair has the following features:
EMERALD DRAC0N ART OBJECTS
Lava Tubes. When the volcano is quiet, the dragon
dlO Object
uses the lava tubes to come and go from the lair.
A traveling cloak worn by an elf apostate named
Great Hall. The emerald dragon resides in a grand
rectangular hall near the center of the vaults, Huwellah Starshine to the trial where she was con
keeping one eye on the hallway leading to the victed and executed
flooded stairwell, never quite trusting that some 2 A nonmagical crystal ball used by Firendelbip, a
covetous intruder won't find a way through. deep gnome seer who predicted the overthrow of a
Treasury. The dragon stores the finest treasures thousand-year-old fomorian empire
in a smaller chamber just above the great hall
3 Spurs worn by the famous human cavalier Rogan
on the map.
vald, who challenged the dragon Arathimax the Red
Watery Caves. Near the bottom portion of the map,
(Roganvald's armor now lies in Arathimax's hoard)
the vaults give way to natural stone caves; these
caves slope down to a subterranean pool that 4 The ornate badge of office of the lich Zakir, nine
connects to the caldera lake via an underwater time governor of the city of Durn
channel. When the volcano is active, the waters 5 A gravy ladle belonging to Lara Rumpledeep, a
here bubble up into the caves before draining famed halfling gourmand
down nearby lava tubes. During especially active
6 A sextant used by the renowned dwarf explorer
periods, the waters surge up into the nearest halls
Thavrik Rustbeard
and corridors before draining away.
7 A jeweled hairnet worn by the cloud giant Ultania,
Underwater Cache. The dragon stashes gold and
gems in an underwater cave (at the bottom of the who slew her own mother to claim her throne
map), the entrance to which lies 40 feet below the 8 A phoenix-shaped brooch passed down to each
surface of the subterranean pool. of the forty-seven recorded incarnations of Gaz, a
Hatchery. The dragon has lovingly arranged the githzerai monk
three small chambers in the top left of the map,
9 A trophy cup engraved with a pumpkin, awarded
farthest from the pools, as a hatchery. Visitors
each year at the harvest festival of Riksdell before
might discover an egg or an emerald dragon wyr
that settlement fell to a plague
mling in one of the chambers.
Preserved Vaults. The dragon has left most of the 10 Rusty chains used to bind the ore master thief
remaining areas of the vaults as they were when Korjus before she escaped and conquered half the
their creators abandoned them, taking great inter lands of the south
est in the artifacts and architecture they left be
hind. Visitors who manage to convince the dragon
they are not a threat are treated to a tour of the
vaults, with the dragon acting like the curator
of a museum.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON II7
=== PAGE 119 ===
FAERIE DRAGONS
d6 Ideal
3 Fun. What's the point of living if you're not going to
enjoy yourself? (Any)
Sa~ what ~ov wi II abovt f ae,vie, dvas:on~,
4 Humor. My jokes make life more interesting for ev
bvt the,~ know f-he,iv pa~tvi~. ~laiv~! eryone. Or at least for me. (Any)
5 Energy. Boredom is worse than death. I'm not
Mavavon~I C-vppie, va~! MMM, now I've,
much for plans, but you can always count on me to
s:one, and made, M~~e,/f hvng-~- make something happen! (Chaotic)
-fiz&an 6 Selfishness. Other creatures exist for my amuse
ment. If tormenting them were wrong, why would I
enjoy it so much? (Evil)
Use the tables and other information in this section
to craft unique encounters with faerie dragons.
FAERIE DRAGON ADVENTURES
CREATING A FAERIE DRAGON The Faerie Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
suggestions for stories and adventures involving
Use the Faerie Dragon Personality Traits and Faerie
faerie dragons.
Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal of dis
tinctive faerie dragon characters.
FAERIE DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
FAERIE DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS d8 Adventure Hook
d8 Trait A faerie dragon has noticed raiders tracking a de
fenseless caravan and is eager to warn someone
Some people say I have a short attention span, and
who can help.
that I'm easily distractable, but they don't ... oh
wow, is that a lute? 2 A faerie dragon seeks revenge on the monsters that
2 I do not constantly steal food. If you can't keep track killed the dragon's ranger companion.
of your rations, that's really a personal failing. 3 A faerie dragon needs help ending a curse that has
begun corrupting local plants and animals in the
3 I'm much smarter than I look, and if you can't say
dragon's forest.
the same, this is going to be a short conversation.
4 A faerie dragon has been harassing local miners
4 Elf, dwarf, horse-you non-dragons all look the
who are disturbing the dragon's territory.
same to me. No offense.
5 A faerie dragon has discovered the entrance to an
5 When I narrate what I'm doing in song, it makes ev
ancient ruin and is eager to tag along while an ad
erything feel more epic, don't you think?
venturing party explores it.
6 The world is a product of my imagination. The fact
6 A faerie dragon has stolen a dangerous magic item
that you think you exist when I'm not thinking about
from a wizard's workshop, without any idea of what
you is adorable.
it actually does.
7 I'm quick to make friends and love winning over
7 A faerie dragon has stumbled upon the recently
grumpy and stoic types. If they don't yet appreciate
dead corpse of a centaur messenger bearing a cru
my help, that just means they need more ofit!
cial warning for the centaur's community.
8 I like to earn people's trust, then lead them into
8 A faerie dragon has been magically compelled to
dangerous situations and make off with their trea
sure while they're distracted. work as an invisible assassin and is desperate for
someone to break the compulsion.
FAERIE DRAGON IDEALS
CONNECTED CREATURES
d6 Ideal
As is suggested by their name and nature, faerie
Benevolence. Jokes are one thing, but I won't abide dragons tend to prefer the company of Fey, as well
cruelty. My mischief brings joy to the downtrodden as wild animals and any chaotic creatures who can
and ridicule to oppressors. (Good) appreciate faerie dragons' madcap sense of humor.
At the same time, faerie dragons' limited attention
2 Variety. How can anyone stand to do the same
spans often leave them starved for novelty, and
things over and over? I take any opportunity to
nearly any creature can attract their interest-at
shake things up by trying something new. (Chaotic)
least temporarily.
II8 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 120 ===
FAERIE DRAGON CONNECTIONS perhaps stealing a child's dollhouse for use as a
manor or convincing pixies to construct them a
dlO Connected Creatures
silken bower. The most elaborate faerie dragon lairs
An entrepreneurial gnome uses a faerie dragon's
are modeled off those of larger dragons, featuring
Euphoria Breath to open a novel relaxation spa; the
multiple chambers and cunning traps.
dragon appreciates the steady stream of treats and
baubles they receive in exchange for their labor. FAERIE DRAGON LAIR FEATURES
An example complex faerie dragon lair is built
2 A faerie dragon is in love with a member of a pixie
around several hollowed-out chambers inside a
royal court and is constantly searching for some
large dead tree. The tree is decorated with the drag
grand deed capable of impressing their beloved.
on's lesser treasures, its limbs draped with scrolls
3 A faerie dragon uses magic to aid in the rambling
and scarves and set with glittering glass. You could
revels of a band of satyrs. use part of the underground portion of the copper
4 A faerie dragon and a quasit are sworn enemies, dragon's lair (map 5.6) to represent such a lair, with
and their invisible battles and the elaborate traps the scale reduced to 2½ feet per square, the hollow
they lay for each other cause havoc in the area spaces tucked inside a massive tree trunk, and the
passages running inside major branches rather
where they both live.
than underground. A typical lair has the follow-
5 A mercenary band keeps a faerie dragon captive in a
ing features:
cage, forcing the dragon to act as a jester.
Trapped Entrance.Just inside the knothole that
6 A faerie dragon nests in the branches of a tree that
acts as the lair's main entrance, the dragon has
recently received the benefit of a druid's awaken
hidden a stolen hunting trap.
spell and promises to teach the awakened tree in
Audience Chamber. The passage opens up into the
exchange for shelter and companionship.
audience chamber, where the dragon lounges on a
7 A faerie dragon rules a pack of blink dogs, leading pillow and entertains diminutive Fey guests (or, in
them on a grand quest against evil that the dragon lieu of Fey, a family of very confused squirrels).
is making up along the way. Hoard and Larder. Beyond the audience chamber
8 A green dragon wyrmling has recruited a faerie are separate hollows for the dragon's hoard ("shin
ies") and larder ("nibbles").
dragon as a spy, though the faerie dragon's bizarre
Sleeping Chamber. The innermost cavity of the
means of carrying out orders leaves the green
lair is the sleeping chamber, which the dragon
dragon wondering if it's worth the effort.
has fastidiously lined with fragments of mirrored
9 A faerie dragon constantly tries to impress a gruff
glass. The dragon preens and holds long, com
dwarf priest by proselytizing to everyone they meet
plimentary conversations with myriad admiring
as they travel together, but the dragon's interpreta reflections here.
tion of their "shared faith" is extremely eccentric. Escape Tunnel. From the sleeping chamber, a con
10 A faerie dragon has intimidated a gang of goblins cealed escape tunnel leads out through a hollow
and now forces the goblins to follow an increasingly root before emerging in a thick briar patch.
bizarre set of rules.
LAIR ACTIONS
As they are presented in the Monster Manual, faerie
FAERIE DRAGON LAIRS
dragons don't have access to lair actions while in
Faerie dragons go where the fun is. For many, this their lairs. At your discretion, a green or older faerie
means dwelling near portals to the Feywild, enjoy dragon can take one of the following lair actions on
ing that realm's unpredictable magic and boisterous
initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties):
revels. Yet it can just as easily mean residing among
Chaotic Aura. The faerie dragon creates misdirect
other peoples-stealing baubles from shrines, nest
ing currents of air and magic around itself. Until
ing in cluttered attics, or following explorers and
initiative count 20 on the next round, whenever
other intriguing individuals on their travels. For as
a ranged attack roll misses the dragon, reroll the
much as they love their homes and hoards, faerie
attack against a random creature within 30 feet
dragons abandon both without a second thought if
of the dragon that doesn't have total cover against
adventure beckons.
the attack.
Faerie dragon lairs are as varied and eccentric as
Grasping Plants. The faerie dragon causes roots
their owners. Some resemble simple animal nests,
and vines to temporarily grow around it; until
hidden away in secret crevices or woven of twigs
initiative count 20 on the next round, the ground
and trash in the forks of ancient trees. Faerie drag
within 20 feet of the dragon is difficult terrain.
ons may also draw on the trappings of civilization,
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON II9
=== PAGE 121 ===
discerning. Faerie dragons' hoards are thus often
a mix of genuine wealth and intriguing trash, with
the dragons paying more attention to the wild sto
ries they concoct around each item than the items'
actual monetary value. These tiny egomaniacs can
often be bribed with cheap but sufficiently respectful
tributes of food and shiny trinkets, though their ten
dency to "borrow" any random object that catches
their eye means a faerie dragon nest might also
contain items of surprising value-often without the
dragon realizing it.
FAERIE DRAGON ART OBJECTS
d8 Object
A fist-sized puzzle box that the dragon hasn't
been able to open, and that holds a tiny clay tablet
marked with a mysterious string of numbers
2 An illustrated tome titled Hrgo/d's Bestiary, which
falls open to an oft-read entry on faerie dragons
3 A majestic military jacket featuring a dazzling array
of medals and five different secret pockets
4 A gold-rimmed monocle sized for a cyclops, com
plete with a gold chain
S A gilded pseudodragon skull that the faerie dragon
likes to wear as a mask while pretending to be a dif
ferent dragon called "Regn us the Unspeakable"
6 A cask of wine stamped with the seal of a noble's
private collection
7 A framed painting of a red dragon destroying an
army, with a hole chewed through the dragon's face
REGIONAL EFFECTS
so the faerie dragon can stick their head through it
The region containing a faerie dragon's lair can be
8 A tiny scale model of a castle that opens like a doll
transformed by its presence, creating one or more of
house to reveal the chambers and secret passages
the following effects:
within
Compulsory Offering. The first time a creature
comes within 1 mile of the faerie dragon's lair,
NATHAIR SGIATHACH
the creature must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom
Sometimes incorrectly assumed to be a god by
saving throw or feel an overwhelming compulsion
non-dragons, Nathair Sgiathach (pronounced "nah
to leave an offering worth at least 5 gp stashed in HAIR skee-HOKH") is the most famous of faerie
an out-of-the-way place. The dragon immediately dragon folk heroes. Like other faerie dragons, Nathair
senses the location of this gift. A creature can be adores jokes-even those made at the dragon's ex
affected only once by this compulsion. pense-which makes Nathair particularly popular
among their pixie, sprite, and other Fey associates.
Malleable Time. Time is fluid within 1 mile of the
Though Nathair's magical powers are far greater than
faerie dragon's lair, flowing somewhere between
those of most faerie dragons (thanks in part to highly
half and twice its normal speed.
developed dragonsight), Nathair still prefers to resolve
Mischief Afoot. Sapient creatures that spend a year conflict with harmless pranks and absurdities, such
within 5 miles of the faerie dragon's lair feel the as making an enemy's buttocks glow red and appear
persistent urge to play pranks on others. to sing folk tunes. When necessary, however, Nathair
doesn't shy away from fighting to defend their beloved
If the faerie dragon dies, these effects fade over the faerie folk. As such, some Fey teach their children to
course of ldlO days. call Nathair Sgiathach's name in times of trouble, on
the chance that the faerie dragon might be lurking
FAERIE DRAGON TREASURES invisibly nearby, as well as to put out ceremonial offer
ings of the faerie dragon's favorite food: apple pie.
Faerie dragons covet treasure as much as their
larger draconic kin, but they are significantly less
120 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 122 ===
GOLD DRAGONS GOLD DRAGON IDEALS
d6 Ideal
Foresight. Righteous action requires carefully
Moclvon~ have- an ine-.xplivable- habit of weighing potential consequences to ensure the cure
is not worse than the disease. (Lawful)
mi~fak.i~ ~/cl clva~n~ fov the-iv le-acle-v;
I 2 Restraint. I cannot right every wrong. I encourage
Pvimv~. The- clva~n~ clon't mincl, ancl the
others to solve their own problems, and I save my
modvon~ clon't ~e-e-m to mind. So wh~ do strength for tribulations only I can address. (Any)
f 3 Stewardship. I do not serve individuals, but rather
I nd thi~ ~o offe-n~ive-?
history. By acting strategically, I tip the ultimate bal
-fizban ance toward justice and virtue. (Good)
4 Objectivity. I remain impartial in my judgments
and refuse to let personal feelings get in the way of
Use the tables, map, and other information in this
what's fair or necessary. (Lawful)
section to craft unique encounters with gold dragons.
5 Isolation. Every interaction has ramifications that
CREATING A GOLD DRAGON stretch on into infinity. I curate my impact on the
Use the Gold Dragon Personality Traits and Gold world by remaining aloof and self-reliant. (Any)
Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal of 6 Sovereignty. Other creatures lack my wisdom and
distinctive gold dragon characters, and use the Gold must be controlled to prevent wrongdoing. (Evil)
Dragon Spellcasting table to help select spells for a
spellcasting dragon.
GOLD DRAGON 5PELLCASTING
Spell
GOLD DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS
Age Save DC Spells Known
d8 Trait
Young 17 bless, cure wounds, slow, suggestion,
I prefer to parley before combat. If villains can be
zone oft ruth
reformed without violence, all the better.
Adult 21 bless, commune, cure wounds, geas,*
2 Shorter-lived species often have difficulty perceiving slow, suggestion, zone oft ruth
the full scope of time's tapestry and lack the pa
Ancient 24 bless, commune,* cure wounds, geas,*
tience for my appropriately thorough explanations.
plane shift (+ 16 to hit), slow, sugges
3 Others might find me cold and dispassionate, but
tion, word of recall, zone oft ruth
such is the price of perspective. Few creatures enjoy
*This spell's casting time is longer than l action.
confronting the relative smallness of their lives.
4 Disguises allow me to bestow small kindnesses and GOLD DRAGON ADVENTURES
experience the simple pleasures of companionship The Gold Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
without constantly being petitioned. I'm proud of suggestions for stories and adventures involving
my acting ability and never break character. gold dragons.
5 The future is writ large in the patterns of history.
GOLD DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
I enjoy conversing with others who think critically
about history and society. d8 Adventure Hook
6 I enjoy gifts but find attempts to hire or bribe me When two cities stand on the brink of war, someone
deeply offensive. needs to make the arduous journey to convince a
gold dragon to arbitrate the dispute.
7 My reclusiveness is a filter. If someone lacks the
motivation to overcome my barriers, then their mat 2 A scholar has learned a secret so dangerous that a
ter is unworthy of my attention. gold dragon is set on magically wiping the scholar's
mind. The dragon is recruiting trackers to locate the
8 On a long enough timescale, all actions are mean
scholar, while the scholar tries to hire bodyguards.
ingless. So why should I deny myself anything?
3 A gold dragon seeks to vanquish evil by conquering
and uniting all nations under a totalitarian govern
ment that will enforce the dragon's benevolent laws.
4 A gold dragon has been attacking travelers in an ef
fort to drive them away from the dragon's territory,
which holds a deadly artifact at its center.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 121
=== PAGE 123 ===
d8 Adventure Hook d6 Connected Creatures
5 A gold dragon has decided to burn a plague 3 An arcanaloth has secured a contract requiring a
infected city to the ground, sacrificing the residents young gold dragon to serve the Fiend once every
to limit the contagion's spread. five years. It can't make the dragon do evil acts, but
6 A gold dragon needs agents to infiltrate a magical the jobs often have unforeseen consequences.
prison complex and liberate the dragon's monk 4 A young gold dragon maintains a lair in a flying
