be- de-li&ite-cl to be- a b/ve- clva5°n . .. if I
and powerful ally. (Good)
we-ve-n>t a platinvM one-.
BLUE DRAGON SPELLCASTING
-fizban
Spell
Age Save DC Spells Known
Use the tables, map, and other information in this Young 15 create or destroy water, major image
section to craft unique encounters with blue dragons.
Adult 17 arcane eye, create or destroy water,
CREATING A BLUE DRAGON major image
Ancient 20 arcane eye, create or destroy water,
Use the Blue Dragon Personality Traits and Blue
major image, project image
Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal of
distinctive blue dragon characters, and use the Blue
BLUE DRAGON ADVENTURES
Dragon Spellcasting table to help select spells for a
spellcasting dragon. The Blue Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
suggestions for stories and adventures involving
BLUE DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS blue dragons.
d8 Trait
BLUE DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
I enforce order and social hierarchies because I be
lieve this is how strong societies are built. d8 Adventure Hook
A blue dragon family demands tribute from desert
2 Why waste time and energy murdering weaker crea
communities in exchange for protection.
tures when I can make them entertain me instead?
2 Enraged at the loss of a wyrmling, a blue dragon is
3 My children, whether born to me or chosen by me,
causing lightning storms to destroy coastal settle
are treasures.
ments and refuses to stop until someone delivers
4 Nothing is funnier than tricking a thirsty traveler
the adventurer responsible.
into drinking a mouthful of sand.
3 A prosperous-looking city appears among the des
5 I have standards for my hoard. Not just any gem or
ert dunes, drawing explorers and treasure hunters
trinket will do.
aplenty, but it's an illusion created by a blue dragon.
6 I'm so pleased with myself and my own good for
4 A blue dragon promises great wealth to anyone
tune that I can't stop laughing or chuckling.
who offers worthy treasures-but eats anyone who
7 I would rather destroy my lair and lose my hoard
misses the mark.
than allow anyone to steal from me.
5 A blue dragon recently acquired trunks full of dress
8 I am sometimes secretly impressed by what other
clothes and costumes and is abducting people to
peoples can accomplish with the proper guidance.
put on a fashion show.
6 A pair of blue dragons is hiring adventurers to find
BLUE DRAGON IDEALS
their missing egg, which appears to have been sto
d6 Ideal
len by another blue dragon related to them.
Order. Life is best when everyone is part of a hierar
7 Rock slides have closed a mountain pass, and the
chy and rules are clear and consistent. (Lawful)
only other road through the area wends through the
2 Humor. Lesser beings exist to be my playthings, and
territory of a blue dragon notorious for playing illu
I excel at finding ways to toy with them. (Evil)
sory tricks on travelers.
3 Taste. I value my possessions for more than just
8 Blue dragon wyrmlings are playing deadly pranks on
their beauty and consider gauche displays of wealth
the people in their territory, and those people are
a sign of inferiority. (Any)
afraid to ask the wyrmlings' parents to stop them.
4 Family. Blood ties are irrevocable, and even if one
doesn't particularly like one's family members, they
come before anyone else. (Lawful)
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 85
=== PAGE 87 ===
CONNECTED CREATURES ADULT BLUE DRAGON CONNECTIONS
In contrast to most chromatic dragons, blue dragons
d8 Connected Creatures
see value in relationships with other creatures, even
An adult blue dragon rules a city and applies exact
if the power balance in those relationships is always
ing standards of aesthetic perfection to everything
weighted in the dragon's favor. Though territorial,
and everyone in it, swiftly disposing of anyone who
they are willing to allow creatures they consider
fails to meet those standards.
their servants to live peacefully within their do
mains. Blue dragons are also more family oriented 2 An adult blue dragon and an efreeti have formed a
than many other dragons, and it's not unusual to friendship over the decades. They now share a terri
find a multigenerational extended family of blue tory and assist one another in protecting it.
dragons sharing a territory. Other creatures need
3 Feeling unappreciated and disrespected in one fam
to tread carefully in such a place, for any injury or
ily, an adult blue dragon offers allegiance to a rival
insult to one of the dragons is considered a strike
dragon family, setting off a blood feud.
against the whole family.
4 A pair of adult blue dragons has decided to take
BLUE DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS over a thriving, wealthy city, whose governor is des
perate to buy them off.
d6 Connected Creatures
5 Decades ago, a gynosphinx insulted an adult blue
A recently hatched brood of blue dragon wyrmlings
dragon, earning the lasting enmity of a whole
has adopted a wounded pseudodragon as a sibling.
dragon family.
2 A blue dragon wyrmling frequently wanders off to a
6 An adult blue dragon has adopted a half-blue
nearby city, where the residents treat the wyrmling
dragon as an heir and is setting this heir up to be a
as royalty.
puppet ruler.
3 A clan of druids has taken in an orphaned blue
7 An adult blue dragon plans to present a loyal bandit
dragon wyrmling, and its members are trying to
clan to a bronze dragon as a courting gift.
teach the creature the value of compassion.
8 An adult blue dragon is obsessed with getting at the
4 A family of gnolls is holding a blue dragon wyrmling
treasure guarded by a medusa.
hostage in an attempt to force the wyrmling's par
ents to leave the gnolls' hunting grounds.
ANCIENT BLUE DRAGON CONNECTIONS
5 Because of the friendship between a bandit leader's
d4 Connected Creatures
child and a blue dragon wyrmling, the wyrmling's
An ancient blue dragon is worried that no members
parents are considering allowing the bandits to
of the younger generation are strong enough to in
move into the dragons' territory.
herit the ancient dragon's territory, and this elder is
6 The accidental death of a blue dragon wyrmling has
trying to start a war to test the younger dragons and
caused a sibling to seek revenge.
determine which, if any, might be a worthy heir.
YOUNG BLUE DRAGON CONNECTIONS 2 An ancient blue dragon without offspring has ad
opted wyrmlings of various colors-including a
d6 Connected Creatures
number stolen from the wyrmlings' parents.
A young blue dragon's family was killed, and the
3 An ancient blue dragon is training an androsphinx
dragon is building a whole realm as a base for exter
as heir to the region the dragon rules and searching
minating those responsible.
for magic items that will allow the sphinx to control
2 A young blue dragon claims the rule of a fast-grow
the weather as the dragon does.
ing city to impress the dragon's family.
4 Under the pretense of helping an ancient blue
3 A young blue dragon running a protection racket
dragon become a dracolich, an archmage is actually
has run afoul of an efreeti, who has decided the area
hoping to claim the dragon's vast hoard.
would be better off without dragons.
4 A tough but fair young blue dragon leads a fanati BLUE DRAGON LAIRS
cally loyal mercenary squad.
Blue dragons make their lairs in deserts and other
5 A young blue dragon schemes to take over a guard
arid landscapes. They prefer warm climates, but if
ian naga's ancient temple.
an otherwise ideal potential lair presents itself in a
► 6 A mummy lord keeps a young blue dragon body cold environment, they find ways to adapt. Instead
guard as a sign of power. of seeking out lofty domiciles, blue dragons build
their lairs underground, burrowing beneath sand or
86 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 88 ===
using magic to hew rock into an intricate warren of only brightly lights the interior but also heats the
rooms and tunnels that can be expanded to accom sand to a comfortable basking temperature.
modate a growing family. Still, they appreciate the The lair has the following features:
tactical advantages of height and usually create their
Entrance Chamber. An open central cavern is the
lairs near a spire or cliff from which they can keep
lair's primary entrance. The glass walls rise 30
watch over their territory.
feet to the surface and are fused with carved stone
Though most blue dragons would be loath to
pillars and partial walls from the ancient city. A
the use the term themselves, their lairs are often
narrow, jagged piece of granite juts out horizon
surprisingly homey. They favor lairs that balance
tally from the wall near the top of the chamber,
beauty and comfort and adorn them in soothing
providing a perch from which the dragon can sur
shades of blue, purple, and green.
vey the cavern. The sand covering the floor of the
chamber sometimes ripples or swirls ominously,
BLUE DRAGON LAIR FEATURES
perhaps in response to unpredictable desert
The blue dragon lair shown in map 5.3 is built in the
winds, the dragon's magic, or some creature lurk
ruins of an ancient city swallowed by desert sands.
ing beneath the sand.
Some of the lair's chambers still contain the rem
Hoard Display. Just off the entrance chamber (to
nants of temples and other structures. The traces
ward the left side of the map), a smaller cavern
of this metropolis suggest that it was of significant
with a worked stone floor contains the dragon's
size, but very little of it remains accessible in the
artfully arranged hoard. The glass walls of this
area of the lair, since the dragon has collapsed the
chamber are studded with blue gems, and narrow
lair on intruders multiple times, rebuilding in a
light wells let in sunlight that bathes the room
nearby portion of the ruins each time.
in dappled blue light. The ancient stone tiles on
The walls of the lair are crystallized glass formed
the floor contain lightning-charged traps to blast
s0 by the dragon's lightning breath. Most of its floors
z are loosely packed sand, with patches of rough stone intruders.
"'
:"
zN
:'; showing through in some areas. The dragon has
Dragon's Den. The dragon sleeps in a large cham
ber in the bottom right of the map. The den is a
constructed a system of mirrors to bring in sunlight
Q_
well-preserved remnant of the ancient city; this
0z from chambers open to the sky, a system that not
>0
z
gracious, elegant space is hung with silk curtains
"'
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 87
=== PAGE 89 ===
in shades of blue and purple, and its worked-stone BLUE DRAGON TREASURES
floor is covered with plush, patterned rugs in com
Blue dragons have strict standards for what trea
plementary hues. It features a bejeweled and cush
sures they allow into their hoards and reject valu
ioned dais on which the dragon often reclines.
able objects that don't meet those standards. One
Private Entrance.Just above and to the right of
blue dragon might keep only treasure that coor
the den is a small chamber open to the sky that
dinates visually with the other items in the hoard,
the dragon uses as a private entrance to the lair.
while another might focus on artwork from a par
A secret door prevents unwitting creatures from
ticular period or seek out jewelry made for rulers
wandering directly into the den.
in a certain region. Blue dragons' hoards are an
Treasury. At the left end of the den, a door set under
enormous source of pride, and these dragons are in
a blue-tiled arch leads to a smaller room where the
sulted by offerings that don't meet their standards.
dragon keeps relics that are too precious for the
Blue dragons favor blue, purple, and green gem
main hoard or that don't match the hoard's overall
stones; art depicting oases and fountains; and fine
aesthetic.
textiles in cool colors. They also love scents that
ADDITIONAL LAIR ACTIONS evoke storms and rain, and magic items that pro
At your discretion, a legendary (adult or ancient) duce weather effects.
blue dragon can use one or both of the following ad
ditional lair actions while in its lair: BLUE DRAGON ART OBJECTS
d8 Object
Misleading Mirage. Until initiative count 20 on the
An intricately carved seal from a civilization that
next round, at each intersection or branching pas
sage in the lair, a creature other than the dragon worshiped the dragon's ancestors as gods
has a 50 percent chance of going in a different 2 An extensive collection of elaborate jewelry, includ
direction from the direction it intends. ing a tiara, tail rings, and claw covers, which the
Sudden Sinkhole. The dragon chooses a point on dragon wears when meeting with supplicants
the ground that it can see within 120 feet of it. A
3 A set of sculptures depicting the dragon's deceased
5-foot-radius, 20-foot-deep pit forms centered on
relatives, all adorned with ground-up jewels
that point. A creature on the ground above where
the pit formed must make a DC 15 Dexterity 4 A jeweled mosaic map of the dragon's territory
saving throw. On a failed save, a creature falls to 5 A glass bell that creates the sound of rainstorms
the bottom of the pit, taking 7 (2d6) bludgeoning and thunder for 1 hour when struck
damage and landing prone. On a successful save, 6 An ornately tooled tome recording the lineages of all
a creature moves to the nearest unoccupied space
the blue dragon families in the area
instead of falling in the pit.
7 A massive geode that contains spectacular blue,
REGIONAL EFFECTS purple, and black crystals
Any of these effects might appear in the area around 8 A blue silk fan painted with ground gems that cre
a blue dragon's lair, in addition to or instead of the ates a briny breeze when hung from the ceiling
effects described in the Monster Manual:
Blue Luster. Creatures that spend a year within 1 IYMRITH
mile of the dragon's lair find blue objects fascinat Known as the Dragon of the Statues and the Doom of
the Desert, the ancient blue dragon lymrith commands
ing and feel compelled to acquire them at every
an army of gargoyles and has studied magic for centu
opportunity.
ries in the hope of transcending her physical form and
Mirage Terrain. The area immediately surround
becoming a god.
ing the lair appears to be a lush oasis. A creature lymrith often appears as a storm giant using her
carefully examining the illusion can attempt a DC special Change Shape trait. In this guise, she infiltrates
15 Intelligence (Investigation) check to disbelieve storm giant settlements and insinuates herself into
it. A creature who disbelieves the illusion sees it the affections of the rulers' heirs, becoming a mentor
to them-and turning them against their parents. She
as a vague image superimposed on the underly
demands great accomplishments from her own off
ing terrain.
spring, but she is more than willing to support and aid
Sandstorm. A sandstorm blows constantly within 1
them with her considerable resources.
mile of the dragon's lair. Ferocious in her youth, lymrith has grown more phil
osophical and even whimsical as she ages, but she has
not lost sight of her quest for transcendence.
88 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 90 ===
BLUE DRAGON LAIR
MAP 5.3
1 square= 10 feet
0
gl)
z
§
0
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 89
=== PAGE 91 ===
BRASS DRAGONS
d6 Ideal
3 Knowledge. What's the point of living for centuries
if you don't learn all there is to know? (Any)
Bavd<; <;oMe-fiMe-<; <;e,e,k, ovt bra<;<; Jra5°rt
4 Self.Determination. All creatures have the right to
laiv<; in hope-<; that the- dra5°rt<;, whiM<;~ make their own decisions about their lives and ulti
mate destinies. (Chaotic)
will e-nhane,e, the-iv c.-ve-a-Hvi1"/, like- a
5 Compassion. Sharing each other's pain and loss
Mv<;e,. The, Move, e,_xpe-vie-rtu-d l>avd<; k.Ytow
brings us all closer to peace and unity. (Good)
not to ove,v<;fa~ the-iv we-lc..oM~ /e-<;t the-~ 6 Cruelty. The most hilarious thing about lesser crea
tures who think they're important is how outraged
awake-rt c.-radling. a <;k1mk. c.-al>l>a~.
they get when I hurt them. (Evil)
-fizbart
BRASS DRAGON SPELLCASTING
Use the tables, map, and other information in this sec Spell
tion to craft unique encounters with brass dragons. Age Save DC Spells Known
Young 13 create or destroy water, speak with
CREATING A BRASS DRAGON animals
Use the Brass Dragon Personality Traits and Brass Adult 16 create or destroy water, speak with ani-
Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal of dis mats, suggestion
tinctive brass dragon characters, and use the Brass
Ancient 18 create or destroy water, locate crea-
Dragon Spellcasting table to help select spells for a
ture, speak with animals, suggestion
spellcasting dragon.
BRASS DRAGON ADVENTURES
BRASS DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS
The Brass Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
d8 Trait
suggestions for stories and adventures involving
I don't ask for much in a conversation partner-just
brass dragons.
smile, occasionally nod, and stay awake!
2 I'm skilled at making others feel that I'm interested BRASS DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
in the details of their tiny, meaningless lives. d8 Adventure Hook
3 Every word I say is worth hearing, so I speak loudly A brass dragon has discovered an unfamiliar settle
and eloquently to make sure I get my point across. ment and is determined to learn everything about
4 I don't care about the opinions of creatures that are the site's inhabitants, drastically disrupting the in
less intelligent than I am. But I'm fascinated by crea habitants' lives.
tures that are significantly more intelligent. 2 A brass dragon is the secret power behind the
5 Hoarding knowledge is no fun. It's best when you throne in an aggressively colonizing realm, using
can trade knowledge away for treasure. this position to learn about neighboring realms
6 I'm fascinated by intelligence with no brain-talking without regard for the consequences.
swords, sapient Constructs, and the like. 3 A brass dragon is the most likely source of crucial
7 I love hearing stories and songs and sharing them information about how to stop an extraplanar incur
with others to bring comfort and calm. sion that coincides with a certain comet's arrival.
8 I have no patience for people who imagine their 4 A caravan is being held captive by a brass dragon
lives are the least bit important. who is delighted to have such wonderfully diverse
conversation partners.
BRASS DRAGON IDEALS 5 Offended by the sudden departure of a rude guest,
d6 Ideal a brass dragon rampages through a nearby settle
Curiosity. The best way to show you value others is ment-and demands the return of a treasure the
to learn as much as you can about them. (Good) guest stole.
2 Perspective. Everyone sees things differently, so if 6 An intelligent magic item in a brass dragon's hoard
you want to know about the world, gather as many sends out a telepathic distress call, wanting to be
different points of view as you can. (Any) rescued so it can be used for its intended purpose.
go CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 92 ===
d8 Adventure Hook d6 Connected Creatures
7 A windstorm uncovers part of a brass dragon's 5 A young brass dragon and a weretiger have become
hoard, and various people and creatures carry off close friends as they try to keep a region safe from a
parts of it. The dragon wants every scattered coin growing horde of malicious gnolls.
and trinket back. 6 A young brass dragon allowed a group of cyclopes
8 A brass dragon, tired of the increasing traffic, starts to shelter in the dragon's lair when they were ha
leading caravans away from safe water sources and rassed by a blue dragon. Now the cyclopes won't
stranding them in the desert. leave, so the dragon is trying to educate them.
CONNECTED CREATURES ADULT BRASS DRAGON CONNECTIONS
Brass dragons seek out the company of other crea
d8 Connected Creatures
tures that can carry on an intelligent conversation.
An adult brass dragon enjoys trading riddles with a
They favor the company of such creatures over all
others, often to the point of not bothering to gather gynosphinx.
minions to do their bidding and ignoring worshipers 2 Long ago, an adult brass dragon swore service to a
who fawn over them. human priest, expecting to outlive the priest. But
now the priest is a mummy lord, and the dragon
BRASS DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS remains bound to serve.
d6 Connected Creatures 3 An efreeti wants to claim an adult brass dragon's
Captured by a band of gnolls, a brass dragon palatial lair and fabulous hoard.
wyrmling is patiently trying to teach the gnolls to 4 A pair of roes have nested too close to an adult
speak Draconic. brass dragon's lair, and they harass the dragon
2 Grieved by the fate of a former friend, a brass whenever they can.
dragon wyrmling guards a tomb haunted by a wight. 5 A guardian naga charged with protecting an ancient
3 Yuan-ti have captured a brass dragon wyrmling and artifact has decided that the artifact-as well as the
are picking up the dragon's twisted sense of humor. naga-would be safer in an adult brass dragon's
4 A party of bandits stole a brass dragon egg, and hoard than left alone in some crumbling ruin.
now the hatched wyrmling is manipulating the ban 6 A half-brass dragon yuan-ti abomination leads other
dits to do the dragon's whimsical bidding. yuan-ti in worshiping an adult brass dragon as a ser
5 A lost brass dragon wyrmling was raised by hyenas pent god, much to the dragon's amusement.
and now leads the pack. 7 Two adult brass dragons are rearing a clutch of
6 A druid who tends a desert oasis has been keeping wyrmlings together, and they allow the infant drag
watch over several brass dragon wyrmlings since ons to wreak innocent havoc on nearby settlements.
adventurers killed the wyrmlings' parents. 8 A solitary adult brass dragon has adopted a blue
dragon wyrmling found starving in the desert.
YOUNG BRASS DRAGON CONNECTIONS
d6 Connected Creatures ANCIENT BRASS DRAGON CONNECTIONS
A young brass dragon and a young blue dragon fight d4 Connected Creatures
over territory. An ancient brass dragon once ruled a temple-state
2 A young brass dragon frequently visits a couatl who through a puppet sovereign, who is now a mummy
is charged with guarding an ancient temple, sharing lord ruling a city of ghouls that owe the dragon
stories to help the couatl pass the years. fealty.
3 A lamia and a young brass dragon lair in the same 2 An ancient brass dragon believes that a local andro
desert ruin, mostly leaving each other alone-but sphinx is an insufferable know-it-all with no sense of
the lamia hopes to corrupt the dragon. humor and enjoys playing pranks on the sphinx.
4 A young brass dragon's lair occasionally spawns air 3 An ancient brass dragon and an ancient blue dragon
elementals that roam around the area for a while, have a centuries-old rivalry, and each dragon manip
causing havoc before eventually dissipating. ulates adventurers into harassing the other.
4 An ancient brass dragon rules a mighty city whose
folk have erected massive stone monuments to
honor the dragon over the centuries.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 91
=== PAGE 93 ===
BRASS DRAGON LAIR
MAP s-4
--------------
...
..
ans . - ·. ···
.• ~-,-c- •
1 uare = 25 feet
Canyons: sq -10 feet
Chambers: 1 square -
92 CHAPTER 5 I DRAGON OMICON
=== PAGE 94 ===
BRASS DRAGON LAIRS Unused Chamber. A smaller chamber shown on
the left side of the map is not currently used by the
Brass dragons prefer to make their lairs in hot, dry,
dragon, but it shows signs of having been recently
rocky areas-desert canyons, caves beneath arid
used by visitors-either creatures welcomed by the
mesas, or ancient stone ruins. Brass dragons often
dragon or ones that escaped the dragon's notice.
compete with blue dragons for lair sites, but are
Wells. Four wells-three in the canyons leading to
more likely to make a lair among rocks than to bur
the main hall and one inside the hoard chamber
row under the sands.
provide fresh water for the dragon and any guests,
Brass dragons like their lairs to be spacious and
and they also serve as a sort of alarm system. As
well lit; many lairs feature windows or skylights
described in the Monster Manual, whenever a
to let sunlight in. They respect skillfully wrought
creature with an Intelligence of 3 or higher comes
stonework and often take over canyon fortresses
within 30 feet of one of these wells, the dragon be
and similar structures when they're abandoned by
comes aware of the creature's presence.
their original non-dragon builders. Brass dragons
are also capable of fine stonework themselves, and ADDITIONAL LAIR ACTIONS
many meticulously carve out grand halls and galler At your discretion, a legendary (adult or ancient)
ies in which to store and display their hoards. brass dragon can use one or more of the following
additional lair actions while in its lair:
BRASS DRAGON LAIR FEATURES
The brass dragon lair shown in map 5.4 is an Animate Statues. The dragon chooses up to three
ancient ruin located within rough, stony canyons statues in the lair that it can see. Each of these
in a desert environment. The lair has the follow statues briefly animates and attacks one creature
ing features: within 5 feet of it, with a +7 bonus to hit and deal
ing 10 (3d6) bludgeoning damage on a hit.
Column Guardians. Massive columns carved to re
Blast of Wind. A mighty wind sweeps through the
semble warriors watch over the main entrance to
lair in a direction of the dragon's choice, blowing
the canyons; the dragon has given them whimsical
along a line 40 feet wide and 100 feet long. Each
names and ascribed unique personalities to them.
creature in that area except the dragon must
Grand Hall. At the deepest part of the canyon, a
succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or
wide archway admits visitors to the grand hall
be pushed 15 feet in the wind's direction and be
that serves as the main lair. Regal statues stand
knocked prone. Gases and vapors are dispersed
bathed in sunlight admitted by huge shafts in the
by the wind, and unprotected flames are extin
ceiling-wide enough for the dragon to climb up
guished. Protected flames, such as lanterns, have
but not fly through. A much larger shaft above the
a 50 percent chance of being extinguished. If
rear chamber allows the dragon to fly directly in
the dragon is within the area of the wind, it can
and out of the lair.
choose to be pushed 15 feet in the wind's direc
Hoard Chamber. The bulk of the dragon's hoard
tion, and the wind can't knock the dragon prone.
is stored in a partially collapsed chamber most
Obscuring Sand. Dust and sand fill the air within
easily accessed by way of a shaft in the ceiling. (A
120 feet of the dragon, making the area lightly ob
narrow gap in the fallen stones filling an old pas
scured until initiative count 20 on the next round.
sageway might allow a Small or nimble character
to squeeze in or out that way.) Eight heavy pillars REGIONAL EFFECTS
surround a well in the floor and support the ceil Any of these effects might appear in the area around
ing around the shaft. a brass dragon's lair, in addition to or instead of the
effects described in the Monster Manual:
AASTERINIAN
Cloud Companion. A small, wispy cloud follows
Like many greatwyrm dragons, Aasterinian is some
non-evil creatures as they journey within 6 miles
times seen as a god. In fact, she is a cheeky and
of the dragon's lair. It changes direction as the
quick-witted brass dragon who often serves as a mes
senger for Bahamut. Her heightened dragonsight al creatures do, remaining interposed between them
lows her to transmit messages easily between worlds, and the direct glare of the sun, and grants them
so all her incarnations know nearly everything any advantage on saving throws to resist the effects of
other one is aware of. extreme heat (see the Dungeon Master's Guide).
Aasterinian encourages all dragons to think for them
Talkative Denizens. Creatures within 1 mile of the
selves rather than relying on the ideas or opinions of
dragon's lair find pleasure in hearing the sound of
others. She cherishes learning and invention and often
their own voices. The air is filled with a deafening
1 takes on Humanoid guise to offer patronage to mortal
scholars and artificers. chorus of birds and small animals, and sapient
creatures talk extensively.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 93
=== PAGE 95 ===
BRASS DRAGON TREASURES BRONZE DRAGONS
Brass dragons prefer yellow, orange, and brown
gemstones that coordinate with their own scales,
..
and they favor precious art objects fashioned from Bvotiz.e.. ch-a9'r1c; ave- -the- a~o[vte- wovc;t ••. ' •
...
brass, including items such as pitchers, braziers, ":-
at mmc;fovMi~ -the-Mc;e-[V(½ ir1to hvrY1at1
and bells. They also cherish organic treasures, from
finely crafted wood to textiles. fovM. The-~ alwa~c; e-Mbe-1/,c;h wi-th e-tm
Brass dragons often invest items in their hoards
haiv iti a/I c;ov+c; of plau½. I applavd
with imagined personality. A wyrmling might have
a favorite marble bust or onyx cameo to converse i~tivi-fit, bvt iti -thic; Ma-fte-v; c;iMple-v ic;
with, while an ancient dragon might have lively di
be-tf-e-v!
alogues with an entire gallery of paintings, statues,
and tapestries. A brass dragon who divides a hoard -fizban
into separate caches often imagines those caches as
individuals (or even groups of people) with indepen
Use the tables, map, and other information in
dent personalities, and the dragon might spend time
this section to craft unique encounters with
in different lairs to socialize with different "friends."
bronze dragons.
BRASS DRAGON ART OBJECTS
CREATING A BRONZE DRAGON
dlO Object
Use the Bronze Dragon Personality Traits and
A finely carved bust of a long-dead human ruler,
Bronze Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your por
which the dragon has named Cornelius and argues
trayal of distinctive bronze dragon characters, and
with incessantly
use the Bronze Dragon Spellcasting table to help
2 An elegant locket holding a watercolor portrait of a select spells for a spellcasting dragon.
dragonborn the dragon fondly calls Lux
3 A polished platter engraved with an elaborate scene BRONZE DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS
showing a person talking to a sphinx; the dragon d8 Trait
likes to imagine being in the scene, dominating the The weakest creatures sometimes display the great
conversation est courage. I respect all beings who risk their lives
4 A sculpture depicting a pod of dolphins leaping in defense of something greater than themselves.
among stone waves, all of which the dragon has 2 My payment is a matter of principle. Requiring even
named and imagines as pets a small fee for my service allows those I help to pre
5 A cameo pendant depicting a human woman the serve their dignity. It's really for your benefit.
dragon calls "Bruno" and imagines to be a brilliant 3 I have no time for chitchat or insinuation. I get to
philosopher the point and expect others to do the same.
6 A statuette of an important deity, which the dragon 4 I respect law and order, but it's no excuse for tyr
calls by a diminutive version of the god's name and anny. Those who abuse power must be stripped of
baby-talks to it, and soldiers have a responsibility to refuse im
7 A large tapestry depicting a party of elves riding moral orders.
stags through the woods; the dragon has named 5 I strive to treat foes honorably, but not at the ex
all the stags and offers condolences on their being pense of strategy. A quick death in combat is its
saddled and mounted own kind of courtesy.
8 A sculpted bird in an ornate cage; the dragon calls 6 I trust my gut. I'd rather act on incomplete informa
the bird Fweep and sings to it tion than be hamstrung by indecision.
9 A large mirror in a frame studded with gemstones; 7 I'm fascinated by other species' military technology,
the dragon likes to gaze in the mirror and imagine especially magic armaments and siege engines
