2 Hedonism. The multiverse is painful enough. Seek but the real culprit is something else.
pleasure wherever you can find it. (Chaotic)
I4.Q CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 144 ===
CONNECTED CREATURES ADULT SHADOW DRAGON CONNECTIONS
Shadow dragons often attempt to blunt their despair
d8 Connected Creatures
by dragging others into their gloomy lives with
An adult red dragon continues to serve as the steed
them. These are generally short-lived relationships,
for a githyanki knight even after transforming into a
though, as most shadow dragons can scarcely bear
shadow dragon.
the bleakness of their own existence.
2 An adult shadow dragon and an evil lich vie for con
SHADOW DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS trol of a crumbling empire, whose thousand-year
d6 Connected Creatures history chronicles their struggle.
A bard befriends a shadow dragon wyrmling and 3 An adult shadow dragon and a death knight are
teaches the dragon about the Shadowfell. both hunted by adventurers. In their previous lives,
the two were sworn enemies, but now they join to
2 A group of wicked duergar has discovered that
gether against their common foes.
dragon eggs hatched in a certain part of the Un
derdark produce shadow dragon wyrmlings. They 4 An adult shadow dragon and a beholder share a
believe (wrongly) that they can raise these wyrm precarious bond, allied against an ancient sapphire
lings to serve them. dragon neither can defeat alone.
3 A shadow dragon wyrmling is training a colony of 5 An adult shadow dragon is gathering a fomorian
darkmantles to guard the lair the creatures all share. army for some mysterious purpose.
4 A shadow dragon wyrmling and a shadow demon 6 A recently transformed adult shadow dragon uses
have become unlikely companions as they compare the new power of shadow to terrorize the adult sil
and contrast their parallel evolutions. ver dragon who has been a rival for centuries.
5 Two shadow dragon wyrmlings of different dragon 7 An adult shadow dragon hired a vampire to con
kinds blame each other for their transformation. vert the dragon's lizardfolk servants to immortal
Undead minions, but the dragon now vies with the
6 A family of deep gnomes adopts a shadow dragon
vampire for the Undead lizardfolk's loyalty.
wyrmling, hoping to show the dragon a noble path
through gloom and despair. 8 Two mated adult metallic dragons try to rebuild
their lives after one becomes a shadow dragon.
YOUNG SHADOW DRAGON CONNECTIONS
ANCIENT SHADOW DRAGON CONNECTIONS
d6 Connected Creatures
A young shadow dragon demands tribute from a d4 Connected Creatures
group of myconids in exchange for shielding the A warlock hopes to make a pact with an ancient
myconids from other creatures of the Underdark. shadow dragon by way of an eldritch ritual. If the rit
ual succeeds, the dragon will be elevated to a status
2 A young shadow dragon kidnaps a cleric to help
akin to that of a Great Old One.
stave off despair. The cleric is torn between at
tempting escape or trying to earn their freedom by 2 An ancient shadow dragon is harried by a solar.
helping the dragon. Once the two were friends, and the solar hopes to
cleanse the shadow from the dragon.
3 A coterie of dragon cultists has fallen under the
sway of a young shadow dragon, and their obei 3 Hidden away in an ancient shadow dragon's lair
sance borders on fanaticism. lurks a demilich, its jeweled skull almost indistin
guishable from the dragon's other grim baubles.
4 A young shadow dragon shares a lair with a cloaker;
the cloaker leaves the dragon alone but hunts other 4 An ancient shadow dragon courts Tiamat, enact
creatures in the lair. ing the Dragon Queen's every demand in hopes
of gaining her affection-and becoming her first
5 A young shadow dragon is attended by the shadows
shadow dragon consort.
formed from the dragon's breath, even though the
dragon despises these Undead.
SHADOW DRAGON LAIRS
6 A young shadow dragon has been summoned from
When dragons become aware of the Shadowfell's
the Shadowfell and forced to stand guard over a
malign influence seeping into their territories, most
wizard's sanctum.
scoop up their hoards and abandon any compro
mised lairs. But some are stubborn, prideful, or
bitter enough to stay, even in the face of inevitable
corruption. More often, a dragon is unknowingly
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 143
=== PAGE 145 ===
swept up by the Shadowfell while asleep, awakening Gloomy Portals. Some caves, caverns, pits, and
after a years-long rest to find that both dragon and other places of deep gloom within 1 mile of the
lair have changed. In these cases, a shadow drag dragon's lair form portals to the Shadowfell, al
on's lair undergoes the same transformation as the lowing creatures from that plane to dwell nearby.
dragon, becoming a shadowy, melancholic version
of the original site. SHADOW DRAGON TREASURES
Shadow dragons that are born on the Shadowfell Shadow dragons retain the preferences of their
or seek out new lairs after their transformations original form when it comes to treasure. With each
establish lairs according to the preferences of their passing year, though, the more lustrous objects in
kind, though they find comfort only in the most their hoards begin to instill a sort of revulsion in the
gloomy and cheerless of places. Reconciling these shadow dragons, much as sunlight does. Gleaming
sometimes-contrasting urges can lead to some very coins and shiny baubles sicken and anger them, and
unusual lair choices. they blunt and tarnish these items to make them
As an example, consider the red dragon lair in easier to look on. Ebony, onyx, and similar dark
map 5.11 as the lair of a red shadow dragon. In hued valuables bring shadow dragons no particular
this case, the once-active volcano has now lapsed joy, but they aren't as inherently repellent as silver,
into dormancy. Its lava flows have cooled into a platinum, and diamonds.
blackened, alien landscape. Ash coats the slopes Beauty fills shadow dragons with contempt, and
of the caldera, picked up by the weird swirling that is true of the treasures they collect as well.
winds common to this region and drawn into the Though they cannot abandon their hoards, shadow
atmosphere. Clouds of ash periodically cast the dragons hide them away even from their own sight.
surrounding lands into deep shadow, before the fine The most resplendent items are always the best
grit once again falls to the ground in a hazy gray hidden, and a shadow dragon's lair contains a great
blizzard. The shadow dragon prowls the region many secret caches. An ancient shadow dragon
during these hazes, rendered all but invisible by the might have a hundred or more such repositories se
eddies of ash. creted about their territory, making stealing from a
In the heart of the lair, even the brightest light is shadow dragon both difficult and dangerous.
muted, and creatures find their eyes playing tricks
on them as details and distance are distorted. The SHADOW DRAGON ART OBJECTS
shadow dragon rarely leaves this place except to
dlO Object
hunt and is attended by dozens of shadows.
An ornate scepter marred by soot and grime
ADDITIONAL LAIR ACTION 2 A priceless painting badly in need of restoration
Shadow dragons have access to the lair actions 3 A lump of melted precious metal that was once a
usable by untransformed dragons of the same kind.
splendid necklace and holds gemstones inside it
The effects of these actions might be cosmetically
4 A series of fine charcoal drawings depicting the
altered, seeming darker, gloomier, and more sub
royal lineage of a prominent drow house
dued. They might also deal necrotic damage instead
of other damage types. At your discretion, a legend 5 A seemingly plain gray tapestry; close inspection re
ary (adult or ancient) shadow dragon can use the veals a tableau in shades of dove, ash, and slate
following additional lair action while in its lair: 6 A pair of stonework gargoyles rendered in a gro
Banish Light. Any nonmagical source of illumina tesquely baroque and terrifying style
tion within a 60-foot-radius sphere centered on the 7 A pile of loose sheet music representing the lost
dragon is snuffed out, and any spell that creates dirges of a famous shadar-kai bard
light within that same area is dispelled.
8 An exquisitely crafted mirror that drains all color
from the reflections of those who look into it
REGIONAL EFFECTS
When a shadow dragon establishes a lair on the 9 A ventriloquist's dummy made to resemble the
Material Plane, the region around the lair takes on vampire Strahd von Zarovich
some of the characteristics of the Shadowfell, creat 10 A peculiar dragonchess set entirely crafted from
ing one or more of the following effects: onyx, making it extremely difficult to tell one side's
Brooding Despair. Creatures within 1 mile of the pieces from the other
dragon's lair that have an Intelligence score of 5 or
higher feel forlorn and hopeless.
Dying Light. Light is diminished within 6 miles
of the dragon's lair, lightly obscuring the land in
gloomy shadows.
144 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
l ......
I
=== PAGE 146 ===
,.
SILVER DRAGONS
d6 Ideal
5 Guile. All the world is a stage, and it is both my
purpose and my pleasure to give an excellent per
Si(ve-v dvagn~ ave- the- b~t of the- b~t
formance. (Any)
kind~ of dvagn~. The-1 jv~t ff't if; 10v 6 Ownership. This town, these families, this world
I've spent centuries watching over them, and they
know?
belong to me. (Evil)
-fizban
SILVER DRAGON SPELLCASTING
Spell
Use the tables, map, and other information in
Age Save DC Spells Known
this section to craft unique encounters with sil
Young 16 beacon of hope, calm emotions, hold
ver dragons.
person, zone oft ruth
CREATING A SILVER DRAGON Adult 18 beacon of hope, calm emotions, hold
Use the Silver Dragon Personality Traits and Silver person, polymorph, zone oft ruth
Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal of dis Ancient 21 beacon of hope, calm emotions, hold
tinctive silver dragon characters, and use the Silver person, polymorph, teleport, zone of
Dragon Spellcasting table to help select spells for a truth
spellcasting dragon.
SILVER DRAGON ADVENTURES
SILVER DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS
The Silver Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
d8 Trait suggestions for stories and adventures involving
People are so wonderfully varied, and I do so love silver dragons.
experiencing life with them.
SILVER DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
2 I'm an epicurean, and I live to eat all the delightful
foods people concoct. d8 Adventure Hook
3 It's my duty as a member of an elder species to pro For centuries, a silver dragon has posed as a sage
tect and guide other peoples. dwelling on a mountaintop. Now it's time to retire
this persona without alarming the people who have
4 I like coming up with new disguises to use among
grown reliant on the sage's advice.
small folk. It makes me feel clever!
2 An adventurer's funeral takes a surprising turn
5 Violence is the provenance of uncouth beings, and I
when a silver dragon arrives to pay respects.
will do my best to avoid its use.
3 A disgraced knight tries to escape the attention of
6 I don't understand why anyone would fight when
the silver dragon whose kindness the knight once
they could talk instead and build on this ecosystem
took advantage of.
of wondrous cultures and fascinating traditions.
4 As a city comes under siege, a silver dragon must
7 I owe the short-lived mortals I become friends with
decide between solitude and saving the place where
the responsibility of watching over their progeny.
the dragon has lived so many lives.
8 People must earn my respect-and they're failing
5 In memory of a long friendship with a late sover
badly.
eign, a silver dragon vows to assist the sovereign's
SILVER DRAGON IDEALS newly crowned child.
6 Portraits have been vanishing from a silver dragon's
d6 Ideal
hoard, and the people depicted in the portraits have
Sensualism. I savor the world and consume its myr
begun committing crimes.
iad delights with appropriate gratitude. (Any)
7 An enraged silver dragon causes a blizzard in an
2 Altruism. We are surrounded by a malignant and
oft-traveled mountain route and will not stop until
unfeeling cosmos. Ultimately, all we have is each
stolen treasures are returned.
other. (Good)
8 A silver dragon is kidnapping children from a vil
3 Camaraderie. The true treasure is the friends we
lage, and no one knows why.
make along the way. (Good)
4 Leadership. These younger species will do great
things-but need some subtle support. (Good)
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 145
=== PAGE 147 ===
CONNECTED CREATURES d8 Connected Creatures
Silver dragons enjoy the companionship of intelli
3 An adult red dragon killed a group of adventurers
gent people, particularly when those folk have no
that an adult silver dragon had befriended, and the
idea as to the dragon's true identity. Silver dragons
silver dragon now seeks revenge.
associate with just about any creatures, though,
4 In making a new lair, an adult silver dragon de
as long as they're confident those creatures have
stroyed the home of some galeb duhr, and the
good intentions-or could be convinced to change
their ways. dragon now seeks help to restore the site for them.
5 A number of adult silver dragons all pretend to be
SILVER DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS painters and vie for the commission to paint the
d6 Connected Creatures ceiling of a huge cathedral.
A silver dragon wyrmling is raised by giant eagles 6 An adult silver dragon leads a group of warriors,
who have lost their own clutch of eggs. changing identities every generation.
2 A silver dragon wyrmling becomes the mascot and 7 Having lost their own offspring, two adult silver
would-be protector of a group of refugee aarakocra. dragons raise a clutch of wyverns.
3 A silver dragon wyrmling practices precocious 8 A solitary adult silver dragon domesticates roes as
shape-shifting abilities among a colony of kobolds. an amusement.
4 A hell hound watches over a silver dragon wyrmling
ANCIENT SILVER DRAGON CONNECTIONS
in the name of its master-a lich hoping to corrupt
the dragon when the dragon is older. d4 Connected Creatures
5 A silver dragon wyrmling besieges a pack of An ancient silver dragon helps a group of spellcast
pseudodragons, intent on teaching them poetry. ers keep the tarrasque asleep.
6 Ogres keep a young silver dragon wyrmling as 2 An ancient silver dragon is secretly the age-old
a pet, and the dragon has become dedicated to blacksmith who creates magical weapons for a king
changing the ogres' nefarious ways. dom's heroes.
3 Bound by an oath, an ancient silver dragon rules a
YOUNG SILVER DRAGON CONNECTIONS dead city in place of its original monarchs.
d6 Connected Creatures 4 An ancient silver dragon has become the figurehead
A young silver dragon allows a stone giant to take and protector of a clan of frost giants.
refuge in the dragon's lair.
SILVER DRAGON LAIRS
2 A young silver dragon in Humanoid form tries
to keep an unsuspecting royal heir away from an Silver dragons make their lairs on mountaintops
and in the clouds. Often, this has less to do with con
attractive stranger the dragon knows to be a succu
cerns such as security and privacy, and more to do
bus or incubus in disguise.
with meeting or exceeding expectations. If humans,
3 A herd of hippogriffs has taken over a young silver
elves, and dwarves expect dragons to be found in
dragon's lair, and the dragon seeks to get rid of the
such lofty environs, that's what they'll get.
interlopers without violence.
This inclination toward using high-altitude lo
4 Two silver dragons compete to see who is better at cales as sites for lairs isn't without complications,
playing the part of a young noble. though. Silver dragons often end up in competition
with other dragons, notably red dragons, for control
5 A young silver dragon rules over a group of yuan-ti,
of such places. And even after establishing their
claiming to be an ancient yuan-ti leader reborn.
lairs, silver dragons often need to fight to protect
6 A young silver dragon performs nightly to entertain
their dominion.
a village of cloud giants, hoping to earn their help in
The lair of a silver dragon is always an impressive
securing a new lair.
sight. Young dragons make their homes in icy cliffs,
excavating space for themselves within the moun
ADULT SILVER DRAGON CONNECTIONS tainside. Older silver dragons sometimes decorate
d8 Connected Creatures their cliff-side habitats with ruins carefully collected
An adult silver dragon watches over a flock of rare from other places in the world. Depending on the
dragon, a lair can be a multi-tiered affair, with its
goats, but a group of storm giants covet their wool.
highest levels extending fully into the sky.
2 An adult silver dragon and a vampire write books of
philosophy arguing with each other's works.
146 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 148 ===
SILVER DRAGOrt LAIR
MAP 5.13
Open ~'\
0
court
I I
I I
Majestic
temple
..
.,,.___ ~-·""'-
c::...·.
--..r-? ~ __ _,..,.__
.. ---.
·.' ., K
~
1 square = 5 feet
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 147
=== PAGE 149 ===
SILVER DRAGON LAIR FEATURES or be restrained until initiative count 20 on the
The silver dragon lair shown in map 5.13 is com next round. Creatures that have resistance to cold
posed of three connected sections-an antecham damage have advantage on the saving throw; crea
ber, an open court, and a majestic temple. The lair tures that have immunity to cold damage succeed
has the following features: automatically.
Antechamber. The antechamber was once an an SILVER DRAGON TREASURES
cient throne room or mountain shrine, but time
More than anything else, silver dragons covet me
has eroded any clues as to its original builders. Its
mentos from the people they interact with. Whether
walls are hung with velvet tapestries featuring he
these are sentimental gifts worthless to anyone ex
roic figures performing a variety of glorious acts.
cept their recipient or medals from a grateful mon
Side Chambers. A few small private side chambers
arch, silver dragons want them all. As such, many
allow the dragon (usually in Humanoid guise) to
silver dragons have eclectic hoards brimming with
meet with visitors.
trinkets and equipment from their own travels: from
Cloud Bridge. From the antechamber, visitors travel
epaulets to hats, weapons to hunting horns, and
upward along a path of clouds. The impressive
even entire longships preserved with magic. Many
route is not as dangerous as its lack of railings and
also maintain a collection of portraits they've had
the literal airiness of each footstep might suggest.
commissioned over centuries to chronicle the ongo
Open Court. Past the cloud bridge is an enormous
ing changes in the art world. In some cases, these
expanse of smooth stone ringed with broken
portraits are a dragon's most prized possessions.
pillars, where the silver dragon hosts visitors in
Beyond such keepsakes, silver dragons prefer
grand style. Though this court is often surrounded
treasures that complement their natural coloration.
by clouds, the dragon can clear them away with a
Diamonds are much coveted, but also turquoise,
moment's thought, revealing a breathtaking view
malachite, and sapphires, all of pelagic hues like
of the surrounding region.
something plucked from the deep ocean. Some
Majestic Temple. The final section of the lair is a
silver dragons also collect ornamental weapons or
grand domed temple set with a plethora of com
ingenious examples of technology.
fortable furnishings. Here and there, souvenirs
from the silver dragon's long life are positioned
SILVER DRAGON ART OBJECTS
with great care.
Under Temple. A broad shaft in the temple opens dlO Object
into a treasury chamber below, where the dragon's A group portrait of nobles set in a faded mahogany
hoard is arranged in gleaming splendor. frame, one corner of which is etched with signatures
2 An ancient shortsword with a pommel in the shape
ADDITIONAL LAIR ACTION
of a goblin's face, its blade notched with heavy use
At your discretion, a legendary (adult or ancient)
3 The shattered helm of a dwarf monarch, mended
silver dragon can use the following additional lair
action while in its lair: with brazed gold
4 A full suit of ancient armor, its breastplate scrim
Icy Grip. A sudden, supernatural chill fills the lair
shawed with draconic faces
near the dragon. Each creature of the dragon's
choice that it can see within 120 feet of it must 5 A pearl-handled switchblade, its blade eaten away
succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw by salt water and its handle emblazoned with a crest
6 An elaborate elven crown made to resemble a drag
D'ARCENT on's head
Like so many silver dragons, D'argent takes consider
7 A triptych of tapestries depicting the end of a war,
able interest in the matters of mortals on her home
world of Krynn. The ancient dragon rarely openly the restoration work that followed, and the sunset
participates in heroics, preferring to help in more sur flight of a silver dragon leaving the renewed realm
reptitious ways. She has been known to join in the con
8 A cape studded with gemstones and featuring
flicts of mortals in disguise, either as a brave human
epaulets of egret feathers, set on the shoulders of a
knight or as a fierce elf healer with gleaming silver hair,
named Silvara. battered tailor's mannequin
Though she is happy to remain in the background, 9 A dramatic portrait of a human noble rendered
D'argent's seeming placidity hides a brilliant intellect,
mostly as shadow and glinting light that reveals the
and she has exposed the machinations of many chro
dragon-shaped pendant the figure wears
matic dragons on Krynn. She is a romantic at heart,
and it is said that she has fallen deeply for mortals 10 A series of detailed obsidian sculptures depicting a
more than once.
human transitioning from childhood to old age
148 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 150 ===
TOPAZ DRAGONS
d6 Ideal
5 Wonder. Though I don't wish to spend time in it,
my soul sings at the sight of the vast beauty of the
A topaz_. dva~n naMuJ 13/v<;te-rl-ail onu;, ocean. (Good)
6 Code of Combat. I despise most other dragons, but
c..oMplainuJ to Me- -that he- hate-cl wate-v
I meet them face to face without resorting to the
bu-av<;e- it ta/W too Mve-h, whate-ve-v
base trickery I use on lesser creatures. (Lawful)
-that Me-an<;.
TOPAZ DRAGON ADVENTURES
-Pizban
The Topaz Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
suggestions for stories and adventures involving
topaz dragons.
Use the tables, map, and other information in this
section to craft unique encounters with topaz drag
TOPAZ DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
ons. Topaz dragon stat blocks appear in chapter 6.
d8 Adventure Hook
CREATING A TOPAZ DRAGON A pirate ship is found floating on the open sea, the
bodies of the crew completely desiccated. The only
Use the Topaz Dragon Personality Traits and Topaz
Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal of dis clue to what happened is a single topaz dragon
tinctive topaz dragon characters. scale on the deck.
2 A topaz dragon has claimed a stretch of coastline
TOPAZ DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS and ordered the residents of a seaside town to va
d8 Trait cate the area or suffer the dragon's wrath.
I seek no company other than my own, for no one 3 A fishery that specializes in a type of eel favored by
else can compete with me. a local topaz dragon is "haunted," and shipments
2 If my offspring can't care for themselves, I'm not of the eel vanish every time the ghost appears.
sure they're worthy of my attention. 4 Legends claim that a gauntlet imbued with divine
3 The sea is beautiful and I love gazing upon it, but I power rests in a temple beneath the waves. Unfor
abhor being wet. tunately, that temple is now the lair of an especially
4 Why should I risk damaging my splendid physique tricky topaz dragon.
when I can fight with the power of my mind? 5 A topaz dragon is injured and stranded far from
5 I am predictable only in my unpredictability. the sea, but the dragon is too proud to ask for help
getting home.
6 It takes true artistry to maintain a warm, desert-like
dwelling under the water. 6 A topaz dragon is building a tableau of desiccated
creatures and has grown obsessed with catching
7 I soothe myself to sleep by imagining the perfect
one treasure hunter who escaped the dragon's
insults for bronze dragons; while I wait to meet one,
I hone them on other creatures. clutches.
7 A topaz dragon has developed a taste for merfolk,
8 I secretly enjoy conversing with lesser beings, al
and the merfolk community near the dragon's lair is
though I usually do so only to find their weaknesses.
desperate for help.
TOPAZ DRAGON IDEALS 8 A topaz dragon is intent on destroying the homes of
all intelligent creatures in the dragon's territory, and
d6 Ideal
desperate locals seek to find out what's behind the
Solitude. My own company obviates the need for
dragon's wrath.
others in my life, whether they are dragons or lesser
creatures. (Any)
CONNECTED CREATURES
2 Change. Consistency is stagnation. (Chaotic) Topaz dragons rarely tolerate any company but
3 Mental Superiority. I hone my mental powers so their own, and they are usually indifferent at best
I can confuse, control, or kill any who annoy me. even toward their own kind. Moreover, their un
(Evil) predictability means that even if a creature proves
itself useful to a topaz dragon, it shouldn't count
4 Territoriality. Any creature that comes into my terri
on being safe from the dragon the next time they
tory has forfeited its right to be upset by anything I
meet. Topaz dragons rarely go out of their way to
do to it. (Evil)
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 149
=== PAGE 151 ===
fight other creatures, however, with the exception of ADULT TOPAZ DRAGON CONNECTIONS
bronze dragons, for whom they bear an inexplicably
d8 Connected Creatures
intense hatred.
An adult topaz dragon vies with a storm giant over
territory. The giant keeps live seafood in a tide pool,
TOPAZ DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS
and the dragon keeps drying out the pool in an ef
d6 Connected Creatures
fort to drive the giant away.
Moved by pity, a giant eagle continues bringing
2 An adult topaz dragon and an adult bronze dragon
food to an abandoned topaz dragon wyrmling, de
are finding their centuries-old enmity turning into a
spite the wyrmling's attempts to eat the eagle.
more romantic passion.
2 A pseudodragon who is fanatical about the kinship
3 A djinni hopes to convince a topaz dragon to tol
of all dragon kind is trying to win a topaz dragon
erate the djinni's presence by driving off a clan of
wyrmling's friendship.
cyclopes harassing the dragon.
3 A topaz dragon wyrmling has developed a taste for
4 Reunited after years apart, an adult topaz dragon
crab meat and persistently hunts a giant crab that
parent and young dragon child realize they enjoy
always manages to evade the wyrmling. (The crab
hunting together.
might have been the recipient of a druid's awaken
5 A tempestuous marid continually floods the care
spell.)
ful_ly dried-out lair of a topaz dragon.
4 A mated pair of griffons found a topaz dragon egg,
and they care for it as if it were their own. 6 A sahuagin baron attempts to gain the support of
other sahuagin for driving away a topaz dragon at
5 A sea hag is on the hunt for a topaz dragon wyrm
tempting to claim the sea devils' territory.
ling, to be used as a component in a fell ritual.
7 A pirate captain tells stories of an adult topaz drag
6 A pirate crew keeps a curmudgeonly topaz dragon
on's legendary hoard while attempting to gather a
wyrmling as a beloved mascot.
crew to raid the dragon's lair.
YOUNG TOPAZ DRAGON CONNECTIONS 8 A ship wrecks near an adult topaz dragon's lair. The
dragon claims what's left of the cargo and tries to
d6 Connected Creatures
ransom the survivors (including the dragonborn
A young topaz dragon engages in repeated aerial
ship captain) back to the city they came from.
battles with a young gynosphinx to determine terri
tory. Both of them are secretly starting to enjoy the
ANCIENT TOPAZ DRAGON CONNECTIONS
bouts.
d4 Connected Creatures
2 A young topaz dragon found and ate a dead sa
An ancient topaz dragon has decided to set local
huagin on the beach, unwittingly incurring the
ogre and bandit clans against one another, hoping
wrath of the sahuagin's community.
they wipe each other out.
3 A flock of harpies enjoy taunting a young topaz
2 An adult bronze dragon has ignored the petitions of
dragon who has moved into their territory. The
townsfolk to deal with an ancient topaz dragon kill
dragon adds a feather to a necklace for each harpy
ing livestock and farmers alike. But now the topaz
slain.
dragon has killed the bronze dragon's child.
4 A curious water elemental supplies a young topaz
3 An ancient topaz dragon's lair contains a portal to
dragon with aquatic delicacies so as to learn more
the Elemental Chaos.
about the dragon.
4 An ancient bronze dragon and an ancient topaz
5 A young topaz dragon continually attempts to steal
dragon are locked in an ongoing conflict that threat
eggs from a roe nest, despite having nearly been
ens shipping and caravans around a major city.
killed by the roe parents multiple times.
6 A clan of winged kobolds consider a young topaz
TOPAZ DRAGON LAIRS
dragon their monarch, despite the dragon's com
Topaz dragons are happiest by the sea. They spend
plete lack of interest and growing annoyance toward
most of their time basking in the sun and have no
them.
desire to get wet, beyond enjoying a bit of sea spray
in the air. But they love being able to see the water,
so they build their lairs on the heights of seaside
cliffs or near perfect sunbathing beaches where they
can best accomplish this.
I
1$0 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
•
=== PAGE 152 ===
TOPAZ DRAGON LAIR
M/\P 5.14
~
.
1 square= 10 feet
Decorated
caverns
0
glJ
z
Si
i'i
CHAPTER 5 I DRACON OMIC' ON
=== PAGE 153 ===
Their preference for lair sites frequently brings to festooned this path with tripwire alarms and mi
paz dragons into conflict with other creatures, since nor booby traps.
they resent having to share their chosen scenic loca Islands. Three small islands jut from the water
tions with anything that isn't food. They often aban below the outcropping. The largest features cliffs
don lairs to seek new vistas, so the interiors of their that rise steeply to a plateau 40 feet above sea
lairs often feel less finished than those of other drag level. The dragon sometimes basks here as well
ons. Topaz dragons decorate their lairs with mirrors and takes many meals atop the plateau.
to make them look bigger and brighter, as well as
fabric and objects in golden shades that complement TOPAZ DRAGON TREASURES
their scales. They obsessively organize their hoards Topaz dragons despise anything made of bronze
but almost never show them to anyone else. but love to hoard gold, as well as yellow and orange
gems that coordinate with their scales. They also
TOPAZ DRAGON LAIR FEATURES
