CHAPTER 4 I LAIRS AND HOARDS 63
=== PAGE 65 ===
REGIONAL EFFECTS zle to a drenching downpour, and it lightly or heav
ily obscures the area.
M1 favovHe- laiv I've- e,ve,v vic;ite:-d wa<; WATER CHANGES
A dragon's presence often affects nearby water, such
a e,v-1<;1-al clVd5°nt. It fvvne:-d e-ve-v1one-t as the way black and red dragons can foul the water
near their lairs. Other regional effects related to wa
voie,e, into a higi-pitdie:-d <;fe,ak..
ter include the following examples:
R&Me-Mbe-~ not all laiv <;he-nani~n<; ave,
Beguiling Water. When a creature drinks from a
de-vac;tafi~ stream or lake within 1 mile of the dragon's lair,
the creature must make a Wisdom saving throw
-fizban
against a DC equal to 8 + the dragon's proficiency
bonus + its Charisma modifier. On a failed save,
the creature is charmed by the dragon for 24
The area around a legendary dragon's lair is al
hours. On a successful save, the creature is im
tered by the dragon's presence. The regional effects
mune to this effect for the next 24 hours.
described in the Monster Manual and chapters 5
Icy Water. All streams and bodies of water within 6
and 6 of this book are not the only ways a dragon's
miles of the lair have a year-round covering of ice
influence can manifest. You can add regional effects
or are frozen solid, regardless of the local weather.
to make a particular dragon's lair feel unique and
Sweet Water. Any water within 6 miles of the lair
wondrous. Adding regional effects to a dragon's lair
is supernaturally pure. It tastes mildly sweet, and
has no effect on the dragon's challenge rating, so
if added to any other liquid, it changes an equal
you can use them freely to set the tone you want for
volume of that liquid into pure, drinkable water.
your adventure.
This neutralizes poisons and turns salt water and
TERRAIN CHANGES contaminated water into fresh water.
Plant growth creates difficult terrain, sinkholes ap
pear, and hedge mazes or icy walls limit movement. CHANGES TO CREATURES
A dragon's presence can alter the behavior or phys
Additional regional effects in this category include
ical characteristics of creatures dwelling near the
the following examples:
dragon's lair. The presence of a gem dragon draws
Exposing Terrain. The terrain within 6 miles of the specific kinds of creatures to dwell nearby, and
lair actively works to foil stealth, giving creatures other dragons sometimes influence animals near
other than the dragon disadvantage on Dexterity their lairs to spy for them. Other creature-related re
(Stealth) checks. Leaves change color to contrast gional effects include the following examples:
with those trying to hide among them, branches
Draconic Births. Beasts and Monstrosities that are
move to reveal creatures, fog clears, and so on.
born within 6 miles of the lair have a high likeli
Smooth Roads. Difficult terrain within 12 miles
hood of being half-dragons.
of the dragon's lair is not considered difficult, as
Draconic Tint. Creatures that live within 6 miles of
undergrowth moves out of a traveler's way, slopes
the lair develop coloration similar to the dragon's.
are not as steep as they first appeared, and rough
Pervasive Influence. People dwelling within 12
ground levels out under a traveler's feet.
miles of the dragon's lair develop personality traits
Wilderness Hazards. Any of the wilderness haz
inspired by the dragon-heightened suspicion,
ards described in the Dungeon Master's Guide
garrulousness, greed, placidity, or the like. Individ
might manifest near the dragon's lair.
uals manifest these tendencies in different ways
WEATHER CHANGES and to different degrees. If the dragon dies or
Fog, storms, precipitation, and supernatural mists leaves the area, these traits fade over ldlO days.
can form around a dragon's lair, and some dragons
PLANAR CONNECTIONS
can alter the weather to even greater effect as they
The powerful magic bound up in a dragon's lair
see fit. Other weather-related regional effects in
can forge connections to other worlds of the Mate
clude the following examples:
rial Plane or even other planes of existence. Magic
Pleasant Weather. The weather within 6 miles of portals to the Elemental Plane of Fire often appear
the dragon's lair is always sunny and pleasantly around a red dragon's lair, for example, and the lairs
warm during the day. Rain falls only at night, and of crystal and topaz dragons are suffused with posi
dew waters the ground in the early morning. tive and negative energy, respectively. Other planar
....
Unending Rain. Rain falls constantly within 6 connections that might appear around a dragon's
miles of the dragon's lair, ranging from light driz- lair include the following effects:
64 CHAPTER 4 I LAIRS AND HOARDS
=== PAGE 66 ===
Draconic Blessing. Bahamut or Tiamat has placed LAIR ACTIONS
the lair under the effect of a hallow spell.
Like regional effects, a dragon's lair actions reflect
Planar Portals. Fissures, archways, or tunnels
an intimate connection to the magical energy that
within 1 mile of the dragon's lair form magic por
flows through and around the lair. The broad scope
tals to an appropriate Elemental Plane.
of that magic means that a dragon need not be
Windows to Other Worlds. Pools or passageways
limited to the lair actions described in the Monster
within the lair allow communication or travel
Manual and chapter 6 of this book. Chapter 5 of this
between different worlds in the Material Plane.
book offers suggestions for additional lair actions
The dragon uses these to converse with echoes on
for various kinds of dragon, which are tailored to
other worlds.
those dragons and the example lair maps found in
DRAGON MAGIC that chapter. Additional lair actions that might apply
Regional effects sometimes give dragons unusual to any dragon in any lair include the following:
magical capabilities. For example, gold dragons can Catch Breath. The dragon rolls a d6. On a 6, it re
appear in the dreams of creatures that sleep near
charges its breath weapon action.
their lairs, green dragons can't be tracked near their Lair Rejuvenation. The dragon regains hit points
lairs, brass dragons are aware of creatures that
equal to the number of Hit Dice it has by drawing
come near water in their territory, and gem dragons
on the magical energy suffusing its lair.
can use clairvoyance to observe particular features Lingering Breath. Any creature that took damage
near their lairs. Similar effects include the follow
from the dragon's breath weapon on the dragon's
ing examples:
previous turn immediately takes 10 (3d6) damage
Death Warning. The dragon is instantly aware of of that type, as the breath weapon's energy lingers
the death of any creature within 1 mile of its lair and clings to its targets.
and can review the last moments of the creature's Toughened Scales. Glowing magical energy swirls
life as seen through the creature's eyes. across the dragon's scales, granting the dragon
Menacing Dreams. People who sleep within 6 resistance to bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
miles of the dragon's lair dream of the menac damage until initiative count 20 on the next round.
ing dragon.
Name Alerts. If the dragon's name is spoken within AGE AND A DRAGON'S LAIR
1 mile of its lair, the dragon instantly knows it and Ordinarily, a dragon gains access to lair actions and
hears everything said within 10 feet of that spot manifests regional effects around a lair only upon
reaching adulthood and the legendary status that
for the next 5 minutes.
comes with that age. The close connections between
a dragon and the fabric of the Material Plane take time
COSMETIC ALTERATIONS
to develop, so the dragon's power doesn't manifest in
Regional effects around a dragon's lair might in
the world until the dragon has spent nearly a century
volve only minor visual or auditory phenomena. This
in a lair. That said, if you want to give lair actions and
includes such effects as the appearance of a copper regional effects to a young dragon or even a wyrm
dragon's likeness on stone formations, the bright ling, you can.
colors of underwater plants near a bronze dragon's Regional effects have no bearing on a dragon's chal ...
lair, or the crystalline growths common near any lenge rating-they exist primarily to help you craft the
proper atmosphere around a dragon's lair. So feel free
gem dragon's lair. Other examples include the fol ..
to have a younger dragon manifest these effects, albeit •
lowing effects:
perhaps in a smaller area than what's described in the
Deceptive Reflections. At first glance, still water Monster Manual or this book and using lower DCs for
any associated ability checks or saving throws.
within 6 miles of the lair shows a reflection of
Lair actions can have a more significant effect on a
the dragon flying overhead; the image disappears
younger dragon's challenge rating. For adult or ancient
upon further examination. •
dragons, who already benefit from legendary actions,
Face in the Clouds. The dragon's visage appears in
lair actions don't significantly impact their power or
cloud formations above the lair, giving the impres how they function in play, but if you add lair actions
sion that the dragon is watching intruders. to a dragon who doesn't already have legendary ac
Starry Scenes. At night, the stars above the drag tions, those actions significantly change the way the
dragon plays and probably adjust their challenge rating
on's lair are surrounded by faint outlines of crea
upward by 1 or more. Use the guidelines on creating
tures that begin to move and act out scenes from
monsters in the Dungeon Master's Guide to determine
the dragon's dreams-including the dragon.
whether you're making the dragon too much of a threat
to a party.
CHAPTER 4 I LAIRS AND HOARDS 65
=== PAGE 67 ===
DRAGON HOARDS WYRMLINGS
Wyrmling dragons begin acquiring hoards as soon
as they can fly, but their small scope of operations
What i<; a dvagn withovt a hoav-d? The
makes them unlikely to amass more than a few
an<;we,~ it -tvv-n<; ovf; i<; 1'<.:i911f e,,antl~ hundred gold pieces worth of treasure and perhaps
a handful of magic items. If sharing a lair with other
dimini<;hw.1
' wyrmlings or adult dragons, the wyrmlings stash
-fiz.ban their hoards in their own distinct portions of the lair.
Otherwise, they keep their treasure in secret caches
near where they sleep.
Hoarding treasure is an essential part of draconic
nature. It's not that dragons are overwhelmingly YOUNG DRAGONS
greedy, as other peoples understand the term As dragons transition from wyrmling to young age,
though some dragons definitely are. Nor are they at around five years, they also begin to look for their
simply attracted to shiny objects in the manner of first permanent lairs and amass more substantial
magpies. Rather, hoards are extensions of dragons' hoards, which grow in value to many thousands of
inherently magical nature-resonators that focus gold pieces. Young dragons keep their hoards safe
their magic and link them to the magic of the Mate in the same central location where they sleep. Such
rial Plane. dragons typically do not yet impose regional effects,
but these effects might begin to manifest as the
AGE, HOARDS, AND POWER ---- dragons' connections to their lairs develop. You can
Dragons thrum with the magical energy that suf- add regional effects and even lair actions to young
fuses the Material Plane, and this energy is ampli dragons, particularly for dragons who have acquired
fied by their possession of material things. In prac an unusually large hoard. These dragons might
tical terms, this means dragons' power is related not be old enough to fully step into the power of an
to both age and the size of their hoards in ways adult, but gathering such a hoard makes them more
that clever dragons-and would-be dragonslayers powerful than other dragons of a similar age.
can exploit.
=== PAGE 68 ===
ADULT DRAGONS box whose empty spaces indicate the number of
A dragon's transition to adulthood is measured by pieces missing.
two milestones: a century of life and a hoard worth
around 15,000 gp or more. A hoard of that size HOARD LINKING ITEMS
binds dragon, lair, and territory together in a tangle d10 Linking Items
of magical energy that makes the dragon truly leg The broken pieces of an artifact (such as the Rod of
endary, empowering the dragon's legendary actions
Seven Parts)
and lair actions and spreading draconic influence
2 A set of large gemstones, each engraved with the
throughout the area as regional effects.
seal of a particular nation or the symbol of a deity
As dragons age and amass larger hoards, they
tend to establish multiple lairs. This serves partly to 3 Numbered volumes of an encyclopedia or compre
mitigate risk-there's less chance of a dragon losing hensive history
an entire hoard in a single burglary if that hoard 4 Statuettes depicting different kinds of dragons
is spread across multiple locations-and partly
5 Portraits of the members of a well-known historical
to extend the dragon's magical influence across a
family
growing territory. The treasure cache stored in each
6 Ornate nesting dolls that feature a large gemstone
lair anchors the dragon's power there even when
the dragon isn't present, extending the reach of re egg at the heart of the set
gional effects. 7 Regalia-an orb, a crown, a scepter, and so forth
Dragons typically establish new caches as their belonging to a recently deposed monarch
hoard reaches multiples of 15,000 gp. Throughout 8 Pieces of a full suit of armor that once belonged to
their adult years, dragons can each assemble six
an ancient hero
to eight caches in multiple lairs spread across the
9 A set of teeth from a rival dragon, a prophet, or a
greater part of a continent.
rare creature
ANCIENT DRAGONS 10 Pieces of a chess set or another board game, or
Around the age of eight hundred years, dragons cards from a deck of playing cards, a tarokka deck,
take on ancient status, by which time they have typ or a deck of many things
ically amassed eight to ten caches whose total value
is at least 200,000 gp. Ancient dragons continue PLUNDERING A HOARD
expanding their hoards as the centuries wear on,
Because dragons' power is linked to treasure, it's
increasing both the number of caches and the value
possible to weaken a dragon by plundering the drag
of each cache, until their total wealth can exceed a
on's lair. By gaining access to a hoard and making
million gold pieces.
off with a significant portion of that wealth, charac
ters can diminish the dragon's connection to both
LINKING HOARDS
that lair and its associated territory.
A dragon dividing a hoard often apportions one or
As a rule of thumb, if a dragon's lair no longer
more pieces from a linked set of objects to each
holds at least 10,000 gp worth of treasure, the site
treasure cache. This practice strengthens the mys
is no longer considered a lair. The dragon can't use
tical link among the portions of the divided hoard,
lair actions there, and the regional effects surround
helping to maintain the dragon's claim of ownership
ing the lair end or fade as if the dragon had died.
over the parts of the hoard far from the dragon's
This suggests an effective strategy that characters
current location and unifying scattered caches into
might hit on for confronting a dragon: find one of
what is effectively a single hoard.
the dragon's smaller lairs and plunder the treasure
This linking can add the fun goal of having the
there, removing it quickly. Disturbing a hoard in
characters collect a complete set of divided treasure
evitably attracts the dragon's attention, because
as they try to find all the caches of a dragon's hoard.
either minions or the dragon's magical connection
The Hoard Linking Items table offers suggestions
to the hoard alerts the dragon to intruders. A dragon
for item sets that a dragon might use in this way.
coming to investigate the disturbed lair has a strong
Ideally, players should be able to deduce the total
incentive to fight in reaction to the theft-and to pre
number of items in the set after they've found one
vent the loss of more treasure. The realization might
or two caches, so they know how many more pieces
come too late that the loss of treasure has left the
need to be collected. Sometimes the correct number
dragon vulnerable.
is obvious (the number of pieces in a chess set or
Theoretically, it's possible to strip an adult or an
cards in a deck, for example), but consider having
cient dragon of legendary status by plundering the
z z w an item found early on be stored in a decorative dragon's entire hoard across all its locations. For
«
Q J: _ this to work, the dragon would have to be magically
CHAPTER 4 I LAIRS AND HOARDS 67
=== PAGE 69 ===
bound or otherwise prevented from interfering with UNFINISHED BUSINESS
the looting-but that sort of binding might be easier
d6 Unfinished Business
than killing a powerful legendary dragon.
Entrust the haunted item to the ghost's heir
HOARD Q;<U..:..._IR_K_ S _________ 2 Entomb the haunted item with the ghost's corpse
A dragon's hoard has features similar to those of 3 Destroy the haunted item
a powerful magic object, and plundering a hoard 4 Use the haunted item for a specific purpose
can have lingering effects long after the death of its
5 Reunite the haunted item with other items forming
draconic owner. Any number of supernatural effects
a set
can linger in and around the hoard of a legendary
6 Destroy the ghost's killer: a dragon who is an echo
dragon, often concentrated in a few valuable pieces
of the hoard's owner on another world
of treasure-the most precious gems or art objects,
or the rarest magic items, for example.
A DRAGON'S CURSE
A dragon's violent death sometimes causes a hoard
REGIONAL EFFECTS
The regional effects associated with legendary drag to carry a lingering curse. A dying dragon might
pronounce a bitter magical oath upon any who
ons' lairs are channeled into the environment from
the dragons through their hoards. These effects can would plunder the dragon's hoard, or a living dragon
linger to varying degrees when a hoard's treasure might inscribe a dire warning about the foul magic
is moved somewhere else, as in any of the follow that will be unleashed on any who plunder the drag
on's treasure. Such a curse typically affects not only
ing examples:
those who steal from the hoard, but anyone else
Alter Water. An item from the hoard pollutes or pu
who comes into contact with the treasure. Moreover,
rifies any water it touches.
breaking the curse is usually possible only if all the
Alter Weather. An item from the hoard attracts
treasure is gathered together again in one place.
weather appropriate to the dragon's kind.
Use the Hoard Curse Effects table to inspire possi
Attract Animals. Tiny animals are irresistibly at
ble effects for a dragon's lingering curse.
tracted to an item from the hoard and constantly
try to take it.
HOARD CURSE EFFECTS
Dragon Dreams. Creatures sleeping near the trea
d6 Hoard Curse Effect
sure dream of the dragon.
Each affected creature gains l level of exhaustion
Personality Shift. Characters wielding items from
the hoard develop personality traits evocative of that can't be removed until the curse is broken.
the dragon's traits. 2 Each affected creature automatically fails saving
Seek Return. Sentient items from the hoard want throws against dragons' breath weapons and
to return to the dragon's lair and cause characters Frightful Presence.
to accidentally stray in that direction.
3 Each affected creature gains vulnerability to the
Verdant Influence. If coins from the hoard are
damage type of the breath weapon of the dragon
placed in soil, they encourage lush plant growth.
who cursed the hoard.
HAUNTED HOARDS 4 Each affected creature's speed is reduced by 10
It's not unusual for one or more items in a dragon's feet.
hoard to be haunted. Restless spirits might haunt
5 Affected creatures can't spend Hit Dice to regain
objects that held special significance to them in life,
hit points during a short rest.
and the death of the dragon who stole those items
6 When an affected creature dies, its soul becomes
might be an opportunity for such spirits to find rest
imprisoned by the slain dragon's spirit, preventing
at last. A haunting spirit might fully manifest as a
ghost, a specter, a wraith, or a similar creature, or the creature from being raised from the dead.
it might give the haunted item the characteristics of
In general, ending the curse on a dragon's hoard is
a sentient magic item.
not as simple as casting a single spell. Magic can of
The most certain way to end a haunting is to com
fer temporary respite, though. A remove curse spell
plete the unfinished business that keeps a spirit
cast on any affected character suppresses the effect
bound to the mortal world. In the case of a haunted
of the curse for 1 hour, while a greater restoration
hoard, you can use the Unfinished Business table to
spell suppresses the curse until the victim finishes a
help you decide what that might be.
long rest.
Returning the entire hoard to the dragon's lair
ends the curse, but removing even a single coin
68 CHAPTER 4 I LAIRS AND HOARDS
=== PAGE 70 ===
activates it again. Short of the drastic step of aban COMPETITION FOR A HOARD
doning the treasure, gathering the entire hoard
Shadowy cults, reclusive scholars, rival adventurers,
together and performing some specific rite can end
and mysterious organizations might seek out a drag
the curse. Such a rite might involve any or all of
on's hoard, either trying to claim it from a dragon or
the elements suggested on the Breaking a Hoard
trying to acquire it from characters who have slain a
Curse table.
dragon. Aside from greed, such groups can have any
number of motivations for seeking a dragon's trea
BREAKING A HOARD CURSE
sure. Often, such groups seek to draw on the magic
d4 Rite Elements
of a dragon's hoard to perform some great ritual.
Cast the hallow spell The Hoard Magic table suggests some possibilities.
2 Make an offering of blood from everyone who par
ticipated in killing the dragon {or those creatures' HOARD MAGIC
nearest kin) d6 Magical Motivation
3 Bathe or sprinkle the treasure in the dragon's blood Create a permanent protective ward covering a city
4 Make a sacrifice to Bahamut, Tiamat, or both state or small kingdom
2 Destroy a large magical ward protecting a region
One other way to bypass a dragon's curse on a
hoard is to have the treasure become part of another 3 Create a dead magic zone where spells and magic
dragon's hoard, whereupon the previous owner's items won't function
curse is nullified. Clever adventurers might work out 4 Repair the fabric of magic in a dead magic zone
a bargain with a friendlier dragon involving a trade
5 Reassert the dominance of the Material Plane in a
of cursed treasure in exchange for a similar (but
region, banishing influence that has been seeping
probably smaller) amount of treasure freely given.
in from another plane of existence
6 Open a portal to another plane of existence or an
other world of the Material Plane
=== PAGE 71 ===
WHAT'S IN A HOARD? You might decide that all the coins in a dragon's
hoard have the same origin, but it's more likely
(particularly in the hoard of an older dragon) that
(:;1!ve-at pi/(½ of c..oiw; ave- all we-II and ~od, the coins have a variety of origins. If you aren't inter
ested in explaining the details of coinage from a va
bvt the- b(½t tve-a~vv(½ ave- the- on(½ with
riety of contemporary and historical cultures in your
me-movi(½ ame-he-d. kt me- te-11 10v abovt game's setting, it's enough to tell your players that
some of the coins are unfamiliar in their size, shape,
m1 c..ollu--fion of pie- plat(½!
or inscription-but their value is unchanged.
-fizban
MUNDANE ITEMS
A dragon's hoard often includes mundane items that
The random treasure tables in the Dungeon Mas can be clues to their owner's personality and history,
ter's Guide can help you quickly generate a hoard and that might inspire further investigation by curi
for a dragon of any age. (As suggested in that book, ous adventurers. The Hoard Mundane Items table
you should roll on the hoard tables at least twice in the "Creating a Hoard" section provides a quick
for legendary dragons.) If you want a more detailed starting point for generating these items. You can
hoard, the information under "Creating a Hoard" on find more inspiration on the Trinkets table in the
the following pages can help you generate treasure Player's Handbook and the tables in the "Dungeon
with more variety, which is especially appropriate Dressing" section of the Dungeon Master's Guide.
for significant troves. The average monetary value of
a hoard created using these guidelines is about the GEMS AND ART OBJECTS
same as if you rolled twice on the tables in the Dun The Hoard Gems table and the Hoard Art Objects
geon Master's Guide. table under "Creating a Hoard" let you randomly
determine the value of each individual gem and art
KINDS OF TREASURE object in a hoard. Use the tables in the Dungeon
Master's Guide to help you describe these treasures.
Use these guidelines in conjunction with the infor
Chapter 5 of this book also includes tables you can
mation in the Dungeon Master's Guide to detail the
use to generate distinctive art objects for a particu
treasures in a dragon's hoard. Feel free to swap
lar dragon's hoard.
coins, gems, and art objects in a dragon's hoard for
different such items of equivalent value. Perhaps a
MAGIC ITEMS
sapphire dragon takes great pride in a hoard full of
You can determine the specific magic items found in
raw sapphires and jewelry featuring sapphires, or a
a dragon's hoard in one of two ways. The Dungeon
copper dragon might love sleeping on a vast bed of
Master's Guide provides a full set of random magic
copper coins!
item tables, labeled A through I. Each entry on the
Hoard Magic Items table under "Creating a Hoard"
COINS
includes a parenthetical reference to one of those ta
The coins in a dragon's hoard might come from all
bles in the Dungeon Master's Guide, so you can ran
over the world and across uncountable ages of his
domly roll an item from those tables. Alternatively,
tory. To add flavor to the potentially enormous pile
you can use the rarity and category (minor or major)
of coins in a dragon's lair, you can use the Coin Or
shown on the Hoard Magic Items table to pick an
igins table to determine the origin of any particular
item of your choice from the Dungeon Master's
group of coins.
Guide, chapter 2 of this book, or any other source.
As described in Xanathar's Guide to Everything,
COIN ORIGINS
the items found on Magic Item Table A through
dlO Origin
Magic Item Table E in the Dungeon Master's Guide
Equivalent value in trade goods (see the Player's are minor items, a category that includes common
Handbook) rather than coins items, potions and scrolls (which can be used only
2-3 Coins from an ancient culture local to this region, once), and other items whose impact on the game is
ancestral to the people who live here now minor or utilitarian. The items on Magic Item Table
F through Magic Item Table I are major items: per
4-5 Coins from an ancient culture in a distant region
manent items that can have significant long-term
6-7 Coins from a nearby contemporary culture
impact on the game.
8-9 Coins from a local contemporary culture
10 Coins from another world
CHAPTER 4 I LAIRS AND HOARDS
=== PAGE 72 ===

=== PAGE 73 ===
..
CREATING A HOARD
A dragon's hoard contains each of the items listed
for the dragon's age category here. For each mun
dane item, gem, art object, and magic item indi
cated in the list, roll on the appropriate table on the
next page.
ADULT DRACON HOARDS
WYRMLINC HOARDS 4,200 (12d6 x 100) cp
4,200 (12d6 x 100) cp 14,000 (4d6 x 1,000) sp
2,100 (6d6 x 100) sp 28,000 (8d6 x 1,000) gp
140 (4d6 x 10) gp 3,500 (10d6 x 100) pp
3 (ld6) mundane items 7 (2d6) mundane items
9 (2d8) gems 21 (6d6) gems
2 (ld4) art objects 10 (3d6) art objects
4 (ld8) magic items 4 (1 d8) magic items
YOUNC DRACON HOARDS ANCIENT DRACON HOARDS
4,200 (12d6 x 100) cp 4,200 (12d6 x 100) cp
14,000 (4d6 x 1,000) sp 14,000 (4d6 x 1,000) sp
4,200 (12d6 x 100) gp 210,000 (6d6 x 10,000) gp
210 (6d6 x 10) pp 42,000 (12d6 x 1,000) pp
4 (ld8) mundane items 9 (2d8) mundane items
21 (6d6) gems 21 (6d6) gems
5 (2d4) art objects 11 (2dl 0) art objects
4 (ld8) magic items 7 (2d6) magic items
•
=== PAGE 74 ===
HOARD MUNDANE ITEMS HOARD GEMS
Wyrmling Young Adult Ancient
dl00 Mundane Items
dl00 dl00 dl00 dl00 Gem Value
01-04 A painting by an artist long forgotten by everyone
01-43 01-51 01-18 01-14 10 gp
except the dragon
44-99 52-75 19-36 15-28 50 gp
05-08 A hogshead (large cask) containing 65 gallons of
00 76-99 37-54 29-42 100 gp
clean drinking water
00 55-77 43-58 500 gp
09-12 Several embroidered throw pillows depicting
wyrmling dragons 78-99 59-93 1,000 gp
13-16 A funerary urn containing remains the dragon 00 94-00 5,000 gp
can't identify
HOARD ART OBJECTS
17-20 A set of seven candlesticks bearing a god's holy
symbol Wyrmling Young Adult Ancient
dl00 dl00 dl00 dl00 Art Object Value
21-24 A tarnished brazier with pleasant-smelling ash
01-95 01-53 01-49 01-22 25 gp
25-28 A drum for use in religious rites, with a forebod-
96-00 54-99 50-75 23-42 250 gp
ing echo to its beat
00 76-99 43-58 750 gp
29-32 A stuffed Monstrosity appropriate to the local
terrain 00 59-93 2,500 gp
33-36 The skull of a Fiend or Celestial 94-00 7,500 gp
37-40 A spinning wheel
HOARD MAGIC ITEMS
41-44 An hourglass filled with sparkling sand
Wyrmling Young Adult Ancient
45-48 A crude flute with a pleasing sound
dl00 dl00 dl00 dl00 Magic Items
49-52 Hundreds or thousands of fake coins inter- 01-34 01-21 01-06 Common minor
spersed with the real treasure
item (Magic Item
53-56 A treatise on alchemy etched on steel cylinders Table A*)
57-60 The battle standard of one of the dragon's an- 35-61 22-49 07-18 Uncommon minor
cient foes item (Magic Item
61-64 A sketchbook from another world of the Material Table B*)
Plane, depicting unfamiliar creatures and one 62-77 50-64 19-41 01-12 Rare minor item
very familiar dragon (Magic Item Table
65-68 A set of irregular polyhedral dice (wi!h 9, 13, 25, C*)
and 34 sides) 65-72 42-64 13-56 Very rare minor
69-72 A map showing the dragon's lair in relation to vii- item (Magic Item
lages and other long-gone landmarks Table D*)
73-76 A kneeling bench, which anyone addressing the 65-69 57-67 Legendary minor
dragon is required to use item (Magic Item
77-80 A scroll containing a long epic poem in praise of Table E*)
the dragon 78-96 73-91 70-72 Uncommon major
81-84 A star chart showing Bahamut and a one-headed item (Magic Item
Tiamat as constellations, with "Elegy for the First Table F*)
World" written between the stars 97-00 92-97 73-80 68-73 Rare major item
85-88 A large, noisy wind chime (Magic Item Table
89-92 A small shrine with a statuette, a brazier, and an G*)
altar dedicated to a god worshiped by many of the 98-00 81-91 74-82 Very rare major
dragon's minions item (Magic Item
Table H*)
93-96 A jar with a dead illithid tadpole floating in pre-
serving chemicals 92-00 83-00 Legendary major
item (Magic Item
97-00 An extensive historical record in the form of care-
Table I*)
fully knotted strings
*See the Dungeon Master's Guide.
CHAPTER 4 I LAIRS AND HOARDS 73
=== PAGE 75 ===
fll.BAN ADDRESSES A COUNCIL OF METALLIC
