2 A crystal dragon wyrmling has foreseen an untimely
but the dragon is grieving as the elf approaches the
end for the bandits who raided the wyrmling's lair
end of life.
and follows the bandits to keep them safe.
4 A pair of adult crystal dragons lairing on neighbor
3 A crystal dragon wyrmling has befriended a white
ing mountaintops have enjoyed a decades-long
dragon wyrmling. The wyrmlings' parents, who are
snowball war, but their antics sometimes cause ava
ancient rivals, regard the relationship with concern.
lanches that threaten nearby villages.
4 A crystal dragon wyrmling encourages nearby farm
5 An adult crystal dragon enjoys shaping the ice and
ers to go on dangerous excursions so they'll return
snow near a den of trolls into a labyrinth and watch
with interesting stories to tell the dragon.
ing the trolls try to make their way through it.
5 A crystal dragon wyrmling finds ice mephits to be
6 Remorhazes infest the glacier beneath an adult
the perfect household servants-if only they would
crystal dragon's lair, posing an imminent threat to
stop trying to kill the dragon's guests.
the dragon's home and hoard.
6 A crystal dragon wyrmling is placed in a monastery
7 A revenant persuades an adult crystal dragon to
to learn the teachings of the monks before returning
help get revenge on the frost giants who murdered
home in three years. The monks don't appreciate
her.
the wyrmling's pranks.
8 An adult crystal dragon teaches astronomy to stu
YOUNG CRYSTAL DRAGON CONNECTIONS dents of a renowned university, but the students
must travel to the dragon's mountain lair for class.
d6 Connected Creatures
A young crystal dragon tries to protect a local pop
ANCIENT CRYSTAL DRAGON CONNECTIONS
ulation of rare snowy owl bears from poachers and
d4 Connected Creatures
hunters.
A clan of dwarves has discovered a self-renewing
2 A young crystal dragon has adopted a group of
vein of quartz near an ancient crystal dragon's lair.
kobolds and is trying to teach them the value of a
The dwarves mine the area aggressively, unaware
good practical joke.
that the dragon is spying on them-and intends to
3 A young crystal dragon has captured a pack of win
demand recompense at some point in the future.
ter wolves loyal to a frost giant, intent on convincing
2 An ancient crystal dragon is stalked by a villainous
the wolves to change their evil ways.
ranger who has already claimed a dozen draconic
4 A lonely werebear enjoys long conversations with a
trophies.
young crystal dragon but doesn't always appreciate
3 An ancient crystal dragon follows a pod of whales
the dragon's sense of humor.
from one sea to another, having grown fond of the
5 A young crystal dragon finds some manticores'
valuable ambergris they leave in their wake. Now
bluster hilarious and befriends them despite their
whalers are scheming to kill the dragon.
fear. But the dragon is having trouble overcoming
4 A community of seal hunters reveres an ancient
the manticores' predatory nature.
crystal dragon as the spirit of their glacier home.
6 A young crystal dragon uses dancing lights and hyp
Such worship amuses and flatters the dragon, who
notic pattern to give an air of authenticity to a char
keeps the hunters safe and leads them to locations
latan fortuneteller's act, in exchange for a portion of
where seals are plentiful.
the take from the charlatan's clients.
104 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
.......
I
=== PAGE 106 ===
CRYSTAL DRAGON LAIR
MAP 5-7
Spire level 3
Central 1 Spire level 2
,
spire level
,:;
Ice bridge
.. ,,I
~L--_:~..:::----::::-:i~
I, •
, .\ I
i
Side view
i \
1 square = 5 feet
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 105
=== PAGE 107 ===
CRYSTAL DRAGON LAIRS CRYSTAL DRAGON TREASURES
Crystal dragons seek out frigid, picturesque loca Crystal dragons covet bright, opulent objects; bau
tions with clear views of the sky above to build their bles and trinkets that remind them of the stars, sky,
lairs. Then, like gem cutters seeking the perfect sun, or heavens; and relics that aid in the divinatory
diamond, they spend much of their lives refining, arts. They prioritize beauty over value, so while they
polishing, and enhancing the beauty of their lairs. adore gemstones of all kinds, they prize fine quartz
Crystal dragons' lairs are often found in polar as highly as cut diamonds.
expanses, dizzying mountain peaks, and glacial Crystal dragons enhance the natural beauty of
floes. Some resemble icy palaces, with numerous their lairs with the treasures they collect, always
balconies offering plentiful opportunities for sky trying to display those items they consider most pre
gazing. Though ice and snow are the most common cious in a tasteful and interesting way and recount
materials they use in the construction of a lair, crys ing their elaborate histories to visitors whenever
tal and other precious minerals feature prominently possible. Indeed, crystal dragons also see amassing
in certain areas. In this way, crystal dragons' hoards such wonderful hoards as a way to attract new
literally become the fabric of their homes. friends to the remote locations they inhabit.
CRYSTAL DRAGON LAIR FEATURES CRYSTAL DRAGON ART OBJECTS
The crystal dragon lair shown in map 5.7 is the
dl2 Object
home of a dragon who has spent considerable time
An armillary sphere revealing the positions of sev
shaping the pinnacle of the tallest mountain in a
eral unknown worlds in the Material Plane (relative
local range, transforming it into a series of gleam
ing spires. Though visitors are rare, the dragon has to the one the dragon is on)
built a roadway that ascends the mountain to en 2 A set of handmade tarokka cards depicting the vari
courage travel to and from the lair. ous wizard clans of a magocracy called Glantri
The lair has the following features:
3 A dazzling array of crystals carved to refract any
Ice Bridge. The crowning glory of this infrastruc light passing through them into star-like patterns
tural marvel is a wide bridge of ice that spans a 4 An oversized monocle custom-made for the crystal
chasm between a lesser peak and the lair. dragon, who thinks it looks stylish
Anterior Spires. Rising from the far side of the
5 A children's coin bank shaped like an owlbear, with
bridge are the lair's anterior spires. These solid,
beautiful blue gemstone eyes
pointed shafts resemble inverted icicles more than
6 An ancient water clock that tells the time with per
towers and enclose a terraced, open-air amphithe
ater that serves the dragon as a parlor. fect accuracy
Ice Sculptures. In each of the areas enclosed by 7 A star chart reproducing the night sky of some other
the anterior spires and the grand spires, four ice Material Plane world
sculptures (shown as circled stars on the map) de
8 A magnificent fresco depicting a noble court in the
pict dragons of different kinds.
Feywild
Promenade. A dragon-sized promenade winds
9 Alabaster panels etched with unusual glyphs, de-
upward from the anterior spires to the summit of
signed to be hung in windows to catch the light
the mountain.
Grand Spires. Like the anterior spires, the grand 10 Astrological birth charts for every year since the
spires enclose a multi-tiered sanctuary of ice and dragon was born
snow. Trusted guests might be invited into this 11 A vast number of colored glass bottles collected
part of the lair.
from dozens of cultures and historical periods
Central Spire. The central grand spire is hollow,
12 A fine divan set with gemstone buttons and stitched
and built into its upper recesses are several icy
with silver thread
perches where the dragon keeps the greatest
treasures. As with everything in the lair, nothing
is truly off-limits to visitors, as long as they show
themselves to be peaceful and respectful (or very,
very interesting). The most favored of the crystal
dragon's acquaintances might even be gifted with
a short trip to the very pinnacle of the central
•
spire-the highest point in the local landscape-to
take in the breathtaking view. •
•
I06 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 1
=== PAGE 108 ===
. .•
DEEP DRAGONS
d6 Ideal
3 Mystery. I appreciate a question I cannot answer, so
I strive to be an enigma for other creatures. (Any)
The.Ye- i~ a cJe;,e;,p cJy-a5°n ~aii~ that
4 Adaptability. Whether taking on a new form, making
tl'"an~lat~ Yovgi/1 to 1111,oyovgi i~ a~ new allies, or trying a new strategy, flexibility keeps
one youthful. (Chaotic)
thoYovgi do~/ bvt MOYe- lrfoy-a/11,
5 Superiority. Weaker creatures cannot be trusted, so
11Vnc.ov'e-Y e-Ve-Y-1 la~t ~tone-!>' ~e;,y-1 la~t I constantly remind my servants of my power. (Evil)
~tone-?! Sovnd~ e-xhav~ti~ 6 Patience. All creatures might teach me something,
and I'm willing to wait and find out what that might
-Przban
be rather than acting in haste. (Good)
DEEP DRACON SPELLCASTINC
Use the tables and other information in this section
to craft unique encounters with deep dragons. Deep Spell
Age Save DC Spells Known
dragon stat blocks appear in chapter 6.
Young 14 command, dissonant whispers.faerie fire
CREATING A DEEP DRAGON
Adult 16 command, dissonant whispers.faerie
Use the Deep Dragon Personality Traits and Deep fire, water breathing
Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal of dis Ancient 19 command, dissonant whispers.faerie
tinctive deep dragon characters, and use the Deep
fire, passwa/1, water breathing
Dragon Spellcasting table to help select spells for a
spellcasting dragon. DEEP DRAGON ADVENTURES
The Deep Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
DEEP DRACON PERSONALITY TRAITS
suggestions for stories and adventures involving
d8 Trait
deep dragons.
I will not risk injury at the hands of weaker crea
tures-especially while I can turn them against one DEEP DRACON ADVENTURE HOOKS
another and have them fight in my stead.
d8 Adventure Hook
2 It is difficult for anyone not of dragon kind to pene Unfamiliar drow adventurers have been prowling
trate the twisting labyrinth of my thoughts. a city's streets at night and have been overheard
3 I might disagree with other dragons, but we are talking about the dragon they serve.
superior beings and should not lower ourselves to 2 Svirfneblin hire the characters to deliver tribute to
direct conflict. their deep dragon neighbor.
4 I have no interest in going to the surface world. It's 3 A disguised deep dragon offers access to rare arti
where one sends one's servants. facts-to a party who is willing to partner up on a
5 While the petty squabbles of other creatures bore seafood shipping business.
and irritate me, I might hear out those who demon 4 A talented young ranger is kidnapped by a deep
strate an appreciation for the finer things in life by dragon who wants a hunting partner.
bringing me delicacies like clams or aboleth flesh.
5 A friendly young copper dragon seeks an entourage,
6 I might be willing to exert myself to take out a mind hoping to impress the deep dragon holding the cop
flayer. Those disgusting creatures must be stopped. per dragon's inheritance in trust.
7 I dream of seeing the deepest places in the ocean. 6 A deep dragon wants to know if rumors of a sea
8 I find I rather enjoy the company of people-as long monster in an Underdark lake are true, so the
as they remain unaware of my true nature. dragon hires adventurers to investigate.
7 Two Underdark settlements are about to go to
DEEP DRACON IDEALS war, having been carefully manipulated by a deep
d6 Ideal dragon. A desperate ruler offers a reward to anyone
Understanding. True power comes from the ability who can uncover the true cause of the hostility.
to discern other creatures' motivations better than 8 A deep dragon wants someone to manufacture a
they can discern yours. (Any) scenario that will get the dragon out of an old com
2 Kindred. All dragons are kin to one another, and we mitment to protect a city.
would all do well to prioritize that kinship. (Any)
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 107
=== PAGE 109 ===
CONNECTED CREATURES ADULT DEEP DRAGON CONNECTIONS
Deep dragons appreciate the company of other drag
d8 Connected Creatures
ons. Although they view most other species as infe
An adult deep dragon has played chess with a drow
rior to dragonkind, having worth only as servants
matriarch for centuries. Each move represents what
or tools, the rare individuals who impress them
that player plans to do next in the competitors' long
can sometimes earn respect as partners-albeit
junior ones. struggle for domination in the Underdark.
2 A fire giant who accidentally insulted a deep dragon
DEEP DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS is tormented by the dragon's servants in ways that
d6 Connected Creatures can't be tied to the dragon conclusively.
An ogre has acquired a deep dragon wyrmling as a 3 A group of cyclopes wants a deep dragon to protect
pet, ignoring the fact that the dragon is an intelli them from mind flayers, but the dragon is uninter
gent creature who will grow extremely large. ested in meeting with them despite their repeated
2 An inquisitive deep dragon wyrmling has made it to petitions.
the surface world. Lost and confused, the wyrmling 4 A nest of vampires has developed a taste for deep
has been captured by a group of cruel adventurers. dragon blood.
3 A deep dragon wyrmling whimsically rules over a 5 An adult deep dragon craves the knowledge stored
worshipful group of kobolds, sending them to the in an aboleth's nearby lair.
surface to fetch delicacies the wyrmling craves. 6 A spirit naga desperately wants to claim the key to a
4 An exclusive auction in an enclave of Lolth-worship mysterious underground door from the hoard of an
ers features a deep dragon egg just about to hatch. adult deep dragon.
5 A deep dragon wyrmling with an experimental bent 7 An adult deep dragon has ended up rearing a young
has created a "garden" of gray oozes. brass dragon and is running out of patience for the
6 An orphaned deep dragon wyrmling is cared for by young dragon's mischief.
a giant constrictor snake that is the recipient of a 8 An adult deep dragon takes pride in breeding hell
druid's awaken spell. hounds but can't control them.
YOUNG DEEP DRAGON CONNECTIONS ANCIENT DEEP DRAGON CONNECTIONS
d6 Connected Creatures d4 Connected Creatures
A young deep dragon has captured a number of An ancient deep dragon has taken on a young red
kuo-toa and has decided to try them out as servants shadow dragon as a protege.
instead of eating them. 2 Two ancient dragon lovers-one deep and one
2 A young deep dragon maintains the guise of a hand white-see each other only once every hundred
some Humanoid artist so as to maintain an adoring years, when they choose targets for a deadly hunt
cult of drow and duergar admirers. ing spree.
3 A rather snooty bone naga serves as a young deep 3 Two ancient deep dragons fight over territory. Un
dragon's loyal butler, as it did for the dragon's par willing to move against each other directly, they use
ent. local settlements-and any competent visitors-as
4 A young deep dragon has organized a society of pawns in their struggle.
hobgoblin explorers, whose members seek out new 4 An ancient deep dragon has put the folk of a city to
places in the Underdark for the dragon to visit. work building the dragon a metropolis to rule in the
5 A doppelganger mimics a young deep dragon's Hu center of a vast underground salt lake.
manoid form while committing a string of murders,
DEEP DRAGON LAIRS
hoping to turn local Underdark settlements against
the dragon. Deep dragons make their lairs in the recesses of
the Underdark, often near the settlements of people
6 Despite repeated mind flayer attacks, a young deep
with whom they have alliances or enmities. Their
dragon refuses to leave the cave where the dragon's
lairs are highly individual. Some are woven from
best friend-an adventurer who won the dragon's
networks of living fungus. Others are built upon the
respect and affection-lingers as a ghost.
ruins of ancient cities or carved into caves near un
.... derground lakes.
108 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
........
l. ' '
=== PAGE 110 ===
Deep dragons' lairs serve as bases for the drag those with an iridescent sheen, and they favor keep
ons' explorations, as well as providing safe storage ing their treasures in frames and on stands made of
for their hoards. When these curious creatures are precious woods and set with even more gems.
away from home searching out new environments It is rare to find a deep dragon hoard that is simply
and seeing new vistas, they usually leave their lairs a pile of gems and treasures, for these creatures
protected by servitors, allies, magic, traps, or some take great pride in organizing and displaying their
combination of these protections. possessions. They can easily spend multiple days
guiding visitors from prize to prize, telling stories
DEEP DRAGON LAIR FEATURES about favorite keepsakes-and when deep dragons
A deep dragon lair might share the same basic
visit each other, these tours can stretch out for days.
structure as the sapphire dragon lair shown on
map 5.12, but instead of being formed from stone,
DEEP DRAGON ART OBJECTS
it might consist of chambers hollowed out within a
dl2 Object
fungus network growing near an underground river.
A statue of an unknown winged antelope-like crea
Whatever the setup, a deep dragon festoons the
ture carved from a single massive opal
narrow, twisting passages between the lair's fungal
walls with magical and mundane traps. A typical 2 A preserved juvenile purple worm on an ebony
lair has the following features: stand set with amethysts
Connecting Passages. Because a deep dragon 3 A cunningly worked metal automaton of a sphinx
lacks a sapphire dragon's ability to shape stone, that, when addressed directly, answers every qu.es
add a few connecting passages or secret doors tion with a question referencing forgotten civiliza
to otherwise inaccessible chambers, possibly in tions
cluding connections to the adjacent underground 4 A set of filigreed gold claw covers set with gems that
stream as entrances to the lair.
change color according to the wearer's mood
Reception Hall. The dragon uses one of the large
5 A silver pelt that belonged to a long-extinct species
chambers in the lair as a reception hall for allies
of bear and sheds snowflakes when touched
and servitors. Like the rest of the lair, this cham
ber is lit by phosphorescent fungal blooms that 6 A painting of a caldera island with unique fauna
give off soft green, blue, and purple light. that shows how to access the interior by swimming
Hoard Chamber. The dragon's hoard is hidden through an underwater cave
away in a more remote chamber, draped in illu 7 A magic chandelier that projects images of the most
sion spells and protected by traps and magical
inaccessible places in the world on the wall, chang
alarms. When triggered, those alarms summon
ing the images each time the chandelier is relit
the dragon's minions and allies first, followed by
8 A magical goblet activated when the creature hold
the dragon.
ing it speaks the name of a country, whereupon
Underground River. Where an underground river
the goblet fills with the finest wine from that land's
runs along the outside edge of the lair, the dragon
has slowed its flow with a rocky dam, creating vineyards
a small pool in which to bathe and raise aquatic 9 A set of exquisite miniature dragons made of pre
delicacies. cious metals, jewels, and stone, with one repre
Guest Suite. A large chamber with connected senting each kind of chromatic, metallic, and gem
smaller chambers, such as that seen toward the
dragon
bottom of the map, forms a suite used as guest
10 The jewel-encrusted skull of an ancient dragon,
lodgings for visiting dragons. Though any trea
which the deep dragon always keeps close at hand
sures with significant financial or sentimental
and talks to when lonely
value to the host dragon are stored away in the
protected hoard, these tastefully appointed vis 11 A magnificent set of drums painted with scenes
itors' chambers contain lesser treasures from from the folklore of an isolated mountain commu
inaccessible or storied locales, chosen to pique nity
visitors' curiosity and provide an excuse for the 12 A beautifully worked statue of the deep dragon in
host to tell these items' tales.
a favorite Humanoid form, made by an artist the
dragon knew centuries ago
DEEP DRAGON TREASURES
Deep dragons adore goods from distant lands, espe
cially if those goods are unique. They hoard memen
tos of memorable hunts or exploring expeditions.
They love gemstones in deep, dark colors, as well as
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 109
=== PAGE 111 ===
'1
DRAGON TURTLES DRAGON TURTLE IDEALS
d6 Ideal
Endurance. We who dwell beneath the waves can
-
I know I didn't ma(ce., dvaf§-On fvvt/e-<;, weather all storms. (Any)
2 Indifference. What do I care for the fleeting con
and Tiamat <;we-av<; <;he- didn't, <;o vvhe-ve
cerns of those who crawl upon the land? (Any)
did fhe-~ c..ome- fvom? Move, impornntl~,
3 Curiosity. I want to know about everything that en
ters my domain, especially oddities from the surface
vvh~?
-fizban world. (Any)
4 Supremacy. Creatures who refuse to recognize my
rule over these waters suffer my displeasure. (Law
Use the tables and other information in this section
ful or Evil)
to craft unique encounters with dragon turtles.
Chapter 6 features stat blocks for dragon turtle wyr 5 Preservation. I am the ocean's steward, tending
mlings, young dragon turtles, and ancient dragon reefs and waters to ensure that they remain un
turtles. The dragon turtle in the Monster Manual spoiled. (Lawful)
is an adult. 6 Eradication. The peoples of the surface world were a
mistake of creation. I will correct that error. (Evil)
CREATING A DRAGON TURTLE
Use the Dragon Turtle Personality Traits and DRAGON TURTLE SPELLCASTING
Dragon Turtle Ideals tables to inspire your por
Spell
trayal of distinctive dragon turtle characters, and
Age Save DC Spells Known
use the Dragon Turtle Spellcasting table to help
Young 13 fog cloud
select spells for a spellcasting dragon. (Though the
Adult 15 control water.fog cloud
Monster Manual doesn't explicitly include dragon
turtles in the variant rules for making a dragon Ancient 17 control water, control weather,* fog
a spellcaster, you can apply those rules to these cloud
aquatic dragons.) *This spell's casting time is longer than l action.
DRAGON TURTLE PERSONALITY TRAITS DRAGON TURTLE ADVENTURES
d8 Trait The Dragon Turtle Adventure Hooks table offers
I speak slowly and deliberately, pausing to reflect af suggestions for stories and adventures involving
ter (or sometimes in the middle of) each utterance. dragon turtles.
2 I am more interested in the shiny baubles people
DRAGON TURTLE ADVENTURE HOOKS
carry than in anything they have to say.
d8 Adventure Hook
3 I think of ships as kindred spirits and like to rub af
A ruthless shipping magnate has bribed a dragon
fectionately against their keels.
turtle to attack competitors' vessels and drive them
4 I like to show visitors the vastness of my domain, so
out of business.
they appreciate how insignificant they are.
2 A curious dragon turtle swam upriver from the sea
5 I attack anyone I notice taking from the sea's bounty
and is now stuck beneath a bridge on a major trade
without offering something in return.
road, terrifying travelers.
6 I think of sailors' songs as their "water speech" and
3 After an unwise attack from a whaling ship, a
try to converse with them by humming snippets of
dragon turtle pursued the ship back to harbor and
tunes I have overheard.
now attacks any ship that tries to leave.
7 I swim alongside ships sailing through my domain,
4 The sea around a wizard's tower is too stormy for
just out of arrow range, so they know I am watching.
ships to sail through, but a resident dragon turtle
8 I am fascinated by the politics of surface realms and
might be convinced to ferry the characters across.
talk endlessly with sailors and adventurers to stay
5 A royal bathhouse was renowned for its sauna, until
current on the latest happenings on land.
the dragon turtle supplying the steam escaped and
started rampaging through the palace.
6 A millennium ago, a fabled sword was buried at sea
with its wielder. Now the sword must be found, and
only a dragon turtle remembers where it is.
no CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 112 ===
d8 Adventure Hook ADULT DRAGON TURTLE CONNECTIONS
7 A dragon turtle has taken up residence in a subter d8 Connected Creatures
ranean lake, and the steam has been driving other An adult bronze dragon has befriended an adult
creatures up out of their tunnels toward the surface. dragon turtle and is trying to convince the dragon
8 A sea god has sent a dragon turtle to unleash devas turtle to help fight off an invading navy.
tation along a populated coast. 2 A marid and an adult dragon turtle are traveling
companions, touring oceans across the multiverse.
CONNECTED CREATURES
3 Shambling mounds grow like an infestation on an
Dragon turtles are stolid and slow to anger. This
adult dragon turtle's shell and spread wherever the
temperament, combined with their disinterest in
dragon turtle travels.
moral quandaries, allows them to get along with-or
4 An archmage is helping an adult dragon turtle write
at least abide-most creatures they encounter. They
frequently enter symbiotic relationships with other a definitive history of the deep.
sea creatures that can bring them food or treasure, 5 An adult dragon turtle serves as a mount for the
and they sometimes agree to work for creatures who storm giant who saved the dragon turtle's life.
ply them with generous sums of wealth.
6 An adult dragon turtle hunts an aquatic purple
worm that has been hollowing out the reef where
DRAGON TURTLE WYRMLING CONNECTIONS
the dragon turtle dwells.
d6 Connected Creatures
7 An adult dragon turtle has awoken from a de
A sea hag has promised treasure to a dragon turtle
cades-long nap to discover that halflings have
wyrmling if the wyrmling brings the hag "visitors"
unwittingly built a seaside tavern upon the dragon
by capsizing fishing boats.
turtle's back.
2 A school of hunter sharks try to drive a dragon turtle
8 An ultroloth works with an adult dragon turtle living
wyrmling out of their waters.
in the River Styx, using magic to protect the dragon
3 A dragon turtle wyrmling shares food with a giant
turtle from the river's effects and charging travelers
octopus in exchange for the octopus pilfering bau
for safe passage to the other side.
bles from passing ships.
4 A dragon turtle wyrmling lairs in a geyser inhabited ANCIENT DRAGON TURTLE CONNECTIONS
by steam mephits, believing the creatures to be d4 Connected Creatures
dragon turtle spirits.
An ancient dragon turtle and an ancient gold dragon
5 A dragon turtle wyrmling is blamed for attacks on meet once a year to trade moves in a game of drag
sea traffic being made by a plesiosaurus. onchess that has been going on for centuries.
6 A dragon turtle wyrmling plays with a pod ofkiller 2 An ancient dragon turtle serves as counsel to an
whales, leaping into the air and blowing clouds of empyrean court, tempering the Celestials' passions
steam each time the whales breach. with the dragon turtle's endless patience.
3 A geas spell forces an ancient dragon turtle to carry
YOUNG DRAGON TURTLE CONNECTIONS
a lich's tower.
d6 Connected Creatures
4 An ancient dragon turtle is responsible for ensuring
A young dragon turtle serves as a mount for a sa that a kraken is never woken from its slumber.
huagin baron in exchange for plunder.
2 A young blue dragon is teaching a young dragon DRAGON T'uRTLE LAIRS
turtle to terrorize nearby settlements so the inhabi Dragon turtles make their lairs in underwater caves
tants will propitiate the dragon turtle with gold. and coral reefs. Most such lairs are situated deep
3 A young dragon turtle serves as a mobile rookery beneath the waves near the ocean's floor, though
for a flock of pteranodons and eats fish they drop. some dragon turtles prefer coastal lairs with easier
access to settlements they can trade with-or prey
4 A young dragon turtle has been enslaved by an abo
upon. Particularly reclusive dragon turtles seek
leth and forced to guard the creature's lair.
lairs in even more remote locales, including deep
5 A clan of gnomes pays a young dragon turtle to
sea trenches or underwater volcanoes.
serve as a mobile refueling platform for their fleet of Dragon turtles are largely unconcerned with the
steamboats. design of their lairs and seldom work to improve
6 A young dragon turtle likes to feast on giant croco them. A dragon turtle's primary concern when se
diles' eggs. lecting a lair is ensuring that the site is large enough
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON III
=== PAGE 113 ===
to accommodate the creature's prodigious size as Reef Hollow. The dragon turtle's lair lies in a hol
the centuries wear on. After that, proximity to ship low in the reef's interior that was bored out by a
ping lanes and freedom from irksome neighbors giant sea worm the dragon turtle killed. The orig
take precedence. inal entrance at the level of the shelf floor ascends
through a weed-choked tube that opens into the
DRAGON TURTLE LAIR FEATURES main chamber. Here, the dragon turtle nests in a
The underwater caves inhabited by dragon turtles
recessed shelf along the back wall, where the crea
are structurally similar to the seaside caverns where ture can gaze down at the hoard scattered across
bronze and topaz dragons lair. When constructing
the chamber floor. Although the lair is mostly
a dragon turtle's lair, you can simply take a coastal
flooded with seawater, a layer of breathable air is
map and translate it to an underwater environment
trapped in the top 3 feet of the main chamber.
or use the map as-is if the dragon turtle is content to Coral Shelf. A secondary entrance grants access
lair near the surface. to a coral shelf 40 feet above the shelf floor and
As an example, map 5.14 depicts a topaz dragon's
illuminates the lair for a few hours each day with a
lair in a seaside cavern, but it could be reimagined
shaft of dim sunlight.
as a grotto in the side of a coral reef rising from a
shelf on the ocean floor, with the following features: LAIR ACTIONS
As they are presented in the Monster Manual,
Shelf Floor. The sandy beaches represent the
dragon turtles don't have access to lair actions
ocean floor at a depth of 100 feet, which is coated
while in their lairs. At your discretion, you can
in a soft layer of fine sediment. The water around
give an adult or ancient dragon turtle access to lair
the lair is clear but dimly lit. The water's edge on
actions, increasing its challenge rating by 1. On
the map represents the lip of the shelf, which de
initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon
scends to a dark plain twelve hundred feet below.
turtle can take one of the following lair actions; the
Coral Reef. The rocky cliff side depicts the contours
dragon turtle can't take the same lair action two
of a coral reef that rises 80 feet above the shelf.
rounds in a row:
The exterior face of the reef is covered with sting
ing corals.
II2 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
......
'
I. ' '
=== PAGE 114 ===
Blasting Current. A strong water current moves DRAGON T'uRTLE TREASURES
through the dragon turtle's lair. Each creature
Dragon turtle hoards frequently contain quantities
within 30 feet of the dragon turtle must succeed
of coral and pearls received as tribute from aquatic
on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be moved 30
peoples, as well as chests full of coins, gems, and
feet in a direction of the dragon turtle's choice. On
trade bars looted from shipwrecks. However, a
a success, the creature is moved 10 feet instead.
dragon turtle's most prized possessions are trea
Entangling Kelp. Strands of spectral kelp reach out
sures from the surface realm. Such objects are
to ensnare creatures in a 20-foot-radius sphere
likely to be fashioned of metal or stone, as wood,
centered on a point in the lair that the dragon
cloth, and paper keep poorly in a dragon turtle's
turtle can see. Each creature in that area must
watery lair.
succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be
More so than for most dragons, a dragon turtle's
restrained until the end of its next turn.
hoard is likely to contain a motley assortment of
Steam Eruption. Steam erupts in a 15-foot cone
