A dragon seeks help, desperate to prevent a personality traits and ideals in chapter 5, to help you
dracolich-worshiping cult from convincing the elaborate the differences between one dragon and
dragon's sibling, mate, or rival to become a dracol the dragon's echo.
ich.
DRAGON ECHO CHARACTERISTICS
2 A dragon suffering from a wasting affliction asks
the characters to travel to another world, where d8 Echo Characteristics
they must destroy an echo of that dragon who has Same dragon kind and age, differing only in physi
become a dracolich. cal appearance
3 A pirate crew under the command of a ghost 2 Same dragon kind and age, differing only in a pecu
dragon fights to recover the dead dragon's scat liar mannerism
tered hoard. 3 Same dragon kind and age, but significantly differ
4 A hollow dragon guards an artifact meant to be ent in personality, ideals, or alignment
used in the dire circumstances foretold in an an 4 Same dragon kind and generally alike, but older or
cient prophecy. Now the prophecy is coming to younger by one category
pass, but the dragon won't let the artifact be used 5 Same age, different kind within the same family
for its intended purpose. (chromatic, gem, or metallic), and similar in ap
5 A gem dragon from another world is searching for pearance and personality
the dragon's echo, which has become a draconic 6 Same age, different kind in a different family (with
shard. a similar breath weapon or habitat), with similar ap
6 A dracolich keeps returning after being destroyed. pearance but very different ideals or alignment
The dracolich's connection to its echoes on other 7 Radically different in almost every way imaginable
worlds is keeping its soul intact, like a phylactery, but still bound by fate across the worlds
and the connection must be severed before the
8 Roll again, and in addition the echo is Undead (a
creature's threat can be ended.
dracolich, hollow dragon, ghost dragon, or dra
conic shard) or a shadow dragon.
42 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
=== PAGE 44 ===
GODS AND RELIGION enlightened dragons include Aasterinian (a brass
dragon who serves as a messenger for Bahamut
and is sometimes identified as a god of invention),
Mo~t cll-'d5-°n~ ,m:,n't what ~ovcl e,,a/1 piov~. Chronepsis (a black dragon who now resides in the
Outlands, sometimes imagined as a god of fate),
To v-e:-all~ Ur1Dl'de,,e, v-e:-liion, one- mv~t and Tamara (a silver dragon of transcendent benefi
be:-liole:- one- ne:,e:,d~ he-Ip. cence, described as a god of life). A number of such
dragons of legend are discussed in more detail in
-Pizban
sidebars in chapters 5 and 6.
Dragons are not religious by nature. They can
grow to become some of the most formidable
Bahamut and Tiamat, the primordial dragons and
creatures in the multiverse without relying on any
the purported creators of the First World, are the
external power, and they learn self-sufficiency and
closest things to gods among dragonkind. Since
self-interest from the moment of their hatching.
they share the same fundamental connection to
They do not appeal to divine powers for aid, nor do
the Material Plane as their dragon offspring, Ba
they beseech them for mercy. That said, some drag
hamut and Tiamat are ontologically distinct from
ons could be described as spiritual. A dragon might
the gods that hail from the Outer Planes. But for
cultivate an awareness of the interconnectedness
practical purposes, they are divine-worshiped by
of all that exists and strive to nurture the health of
mortal creatures, able to grant cleric spells to their
the whole or to exploit that connection. But even the
followers, and both ageless and immortal. Since the
most spiritual dragons have a keen sense of their
destruction of the First World, both primordial drag
own importance.
ons now dwell in the Outer Planes-Bahamut on
Mount Celestia and Tiamat in the Nine Hells.
On many worlds, Humanoids worship Bahamut
and Tiamat as gods. On Krynn, they are the great
est among the gods, though they are known there
as Paladine and Takhisis and are not always
pictured as dragons. In the Dawn War pantheon
described in the Dungeon Master's Guide, Ba
hamut is revered as a god of justice and nobil-
ity, favored by paladins, while Tiamat is known
as a god of greed, wealth, and vengeance.
Dragons view the primordial dragons differ
ently. To metallic dragons, Bahamut is more
like a king than a god. Individual dragons
might owe Bahamut allegiance, respect him,
pay tribute to him, and strive to emulate him.
Similarly, chromatic dragons might fear,
respect, envy, and appease Tiamat as a sover
eign. But none of those attitudes and behav
iors bear any resemblance in a dragon's mind
to the worship that mortals offer to their gods.
A few other dragons also command rev
erence from their kin. These are often
greatwyrms who have undergone a sort of
apotheosis, joining multiple echoes of them
selves into a single powerful form. A few are
ancient dragons who have cultivated their
dragonsight to such a degree that they can
coordinate the actions of their echoes across
the Material Plane, influencing events on
multiple worlds at once. Humanoids might
consider these dragons gods, but as with Ba
hamut and Tiamat, dragons respect these fig
ures for their wisdom, their might, their magic,
and their wealth; they don't worship them. Such
=== PAGE 45 ===
SHAPE-SHIFTING elderly sage or wizard, other times as a young fisher
or monk. In any of these forms, he is often accom
panied by seven gold dragons in the form of brilliant
The- -lime- a dva~n ~pe-nd~ in a hvmanoid yellow songbirds.
Famously, Bahamut traveled the world of Krynn in
fovm i~ not dive,e,,,t/~ ve-late-d to ovv opinion
the guise of a human wizard named Fizban, guiding
of ~aid fovm. In fac.,f; dva~n~ g,ne-va/1~ the peoples of that world as they prepared for war
against the evil forces of Tiamat. In the same way,
di~ay-e,e, wi+h Mom/~ abovt vi~val ta~te-.
some metallic dragons use their Humanoid forms to
Mo~t of ~ov ave, e-xtve-me-1~ mi~ide-d. influence people. Since they can remain in Human
oid form indefinitely, metallic dragons often create
l--ook,~ ja~~~ have- not he-lpe-d.
false identities and mundane lives for themselves.
-fizban Thanks to their keen intellects and strong person
alities, shape-shifted dragons can easily end up in
positions of leadership-either overtly as mayors,
Most metallic and gem dragons can change shape to
high priests, the heads of knightly orders, or crime
take on a Humanoid or Beast form by the time they
bosses or behind the scenes as advisors, activists,
reach adulthood or ancient age. A few other Dragon
or the spouses of rulers.
varieties possess similar abilities (including deep
Of course, years of careful scheming can be
dragons, described in chapter 6), and you can give
quickly unraveled if a shape-shifted dragon's true
any dragon the Change Shape action of an adult or
nature is discovered. As a result, such dragons are
ancient dragon without affecting the dragon's chal
careful to avoid being seen in their true forms. They
lenge rating (as noted under "Customizing Dragons"
show great caution in dealing with adventurers or
earlier in this chapter). Likewise, if you use the
anyone else who might have the magical ability
Monster Manual variant rule to make dragons innate
to expose their nature. And dragons who need to
spellcasters, you could give any adult or older dragon
revert to their true form are careful to do so out of
the polymorph spell to take on an alternate form.
sight-or to leave no surviving witnesses.
Dragons typically use their shape-shifting ability
Some metallic dragons believe that if they remain
to move about in the world without drawing atten
in a shape-shifted form for too long, they'll lose the
tion to themselves. Dragons like to know as much
ability to revert to their true form. This is probably
as they can about the lands around their lairs and
just superstition, but many dragons claim to know of
the inhabitants of those lands, and posing as a more
others of their kind condemned to spend the rest of
innocuous creature is an easy way to gather such
a very long life trapped in Humanoid or Beast form.
information. Many metallic dragons also believe
Because of this belief, dragons who spend prolonged
they are following the example of Bahamut, who is
periods in the guise of other creatures often find pe
known to wander the worlds of the Material Plane
riodic excuses to venture into the wilderness, letting
in Humanoid guise, appearing sometimes as an
them stretch their wings away from prying eyes.
DRAGONS OF SONG AND STEEL DRAGON ORGANIZATIONS
The propensity of some metallic dragons to spend
long periods of time in Humanoid form has led to nu
merous bits of folklore, including tales in which these The- on/~ +hi~ be--tte-v +han g,tti~ a
shape-shifters are sometimes erroneously identified as dva~n involve-ct .. . i~ g,tti~ f ve- dva~n~
unique varieties of metallic dragons.
In the world of the Forgotten Realms, stories speak involve-di
of "weredragons" or "song dragons," which are vari
ously described as "beautiful humans transformed into
dragons" or as a distinct variety of metallic dragon.
The world of Greyhawk has legends of similar drag
Most dragons are solitary, living alone or keeping
ons, called either Greyhawk dragons or steel dragons,
which are said to favor life among Humanoids in the company with only a single dragon companion or
hustle and bustle of great cities. a tight family group. Occasionally, though, dragons
The creatures featured in these legends are almost form associations with other dragons in pursuit of
certainly copper, silver, or other metallic dragons who a common purpose. These associations are more
simply favored that particular form. Some dragons
common among lawful dragons and center around
even seem to prefer Humanoid form to their own and
goals broader than a single dragon's territory or con
delight in surrounding themselves with companions
cerns. This section discusses several organizations
who can answer their endless questions about Human
oid art, culture, history, and politics. whose plots can unfold across small regions, whole
worlds, or even multiple worlds.
44 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
I --'
=== PAGE 46 ===
CULT OF THE DRAGON entire ... " Guided by this new vision, Severin has
Founded in Faen1n, the Cult of the Dragon was worked tirelessly to bring about the ascendance to
based on a mistranslated prophecy that "dead power of living dragons, even attempting to bring an
dragons shall rule the world entire." For most of its avatar of Tiamat into the world to wreak havoc (and
history, the cult has focused on creating dracoliches nearly succeeding).
to fulfill this prophecy. Its members have been re Dissent in the Ranks. Since the failure of Sev
sponsible for creating more dracoliches than any erin's effort to bring Tiamat into the world, the Cult
other force on the Material Plane. And thanks to of the Dragon has been sharply divided. Some of
the corruption that spreads between worlds when its members pursue Severin's new vision for the
ever a dragon embraces undeath (see "Undeath" cult, keeping their focus on his reinterpretation of
earlier in this chapter), the cult's influence has been the prophecy. Others still support the prophecy's
tremendous. old interpretation, continuing their efforts to create
In recent years, Tiamat has worked through a dracoliches.
young member of the Cult of the Dragon to alter Adventure Hooks. The Tyranny ofD ragons ad
the cult's foundational beliefs. The Dragon Queen venture details the cult's efforts to bring Tiamat's
steered this prophet, named Severin, to the correct avatar into the world. Beyond that plot, the Cult of
translation of the cult's foundational prophecy: the Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers sugges
". .. naught will be left save shattered thrones, with tions for how adventurers might encounter this sin
no rulers but the dead. Dragons shall rule the world ister cult.
=== PAGE 47 ===
(ULT OF THE DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS As described in Eberron: Rising from the Last
War, the dragons of the Chamber primarily act as
d6 Adventure Hook
observers, gathering information about new aspects
A group of cultists has stolen a dragon egg, with
of the Prophecy. They are also charged with stop
the dual goal of hatching a minion for themselves
ping any creatures attempting to use the Prophecy
and gaining leverage over the dragon who was car for their own ends, including agents of the ancient
ing for the egg. But the dragon wants the egg back. Fiends known as the Lords of Dust. That said, some
2 A group of cultists is trying to access a magic por members of the Chamber try to take the fulfillment
tal linking the Material Plane to Tiamat's domain, of the Prophecy into their own talons, directing the
hoping to break the seal that has kept the portal future toward outcomes they desire.
Marks ofP rophecy. The dragons of the Chamber
closed for centuries.
recognize the dragonmarks that appear on the skin
3 A dragon whose echo on another world has be
of certain Humanoids on Eberron as manifestations
come a dracolich suffers from a wasting affliction
of the Prophecy. These marks reveal nuances of the
(see "Undeath" above). Members of the Cult of the
Prophecy to those who can understand them and
Dragon are trying to persuade the afflicted dragon
lend symbolic weight to the actions of those who
to become a dracolich as well. bear them- for example, a person with the Mark of
4 A dragon and a dracolich, representing the oppos Storm might fulfill the role of "a mighty storm" in
ing factions of the Cult of the Dragon, war against the Prophecy. For this reason, agents of the Cham
each other. Their battle is devastating the region ber are interested in the activities of dragonmarked
families and heirs.
between their lairs and endangers countless inno
Prophetic Dragonsight. Most agents of the
cents.
Chamber assume the Draconic Prophecy is con
5 A group of cultists searches for all the Orbs of Drag•
cerned only with the unfolding of possible futures
onkind, planning to use them to bend dragons to
on Eberron. A few of the organization's most ancient
their will.
members, though, have developed their dragonsight
6 A fringe group of cultists decides to focus on the enough to explore the ramifications of the Prophecy
"shattered thrones" part of the ancient prophecy across other worlds of the Material Plane. Drag-
and attempts to assassinate rulers and destroy ons on multiple worlds might thus act as agents of
their seats of power. the Chamber, manipulating history on their own
worlds to see whether that affects the unfolding of
THE CHAMBER the Prophecy on Eberron. These elders reason that
A cabal of dragons called the Chamber keeps tabs if dragons can connect their echoes across worlds,
on events unfolding across the world of Eberron, then all worlds must exist in a sort of entanglement
monitoring and manipulating the fulfillment of the of causality. This makes the map of possible futures
ancient Draconic Prophecy. Most other creatures infinitely more complex and tantalizing-and subject
are merely pawns in the dragons' centuries-long to careful manipulation.
schemes, their needs and lives relevant only insofar Adventure Hooks. Eberron: Rising from the
as they intersect with the Prophecy. Last War contains abundant ideas for adventures
The Draconic Prophecy is not a single collection related to the Chamber's activities on Eberron. The
of oracular sayings, nor is it any kind of organized Chamber Adventure Hooks table here suggests
prediction of future events. Rather, the Prophecy is additional ways characters on other worlds might
a map of possible futures-an outline of the com become entangled in the schemes and experiments
plex relationships of cause and effect. Dragons of of the Chamber, by way of agents whose awareness
the Chamber study it not to know what the future extends beyond Eberron.
holds, but so they can comprehend the possible con
sequences of any action they or others might take
consequences that might unfold over the course of
centuries. From the perspective of the dragons of
the Chamber, the tumultuous events of national his
tories are but tiny waves in a vast ocean, but those
waves are often warnings of the mightier forces of
the tides.
r
CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY •
I I •·
=== PAGE 48 ===
CHAMBER ADVENTURE HOOKS Diverse Dragons. The hidecarved dragons of a
lauth share a goal but often have little else in com
d6 Adventure Hook
mon. By design, each member of a lauth is usually
An agent of the Chamber has plundered the re
a different kind of dragon, bringing particular abil
search of an eccentric sage whose work is widely
ities and perspective to bear on the group's goal.
considered nonsense, suggesting that something Likewise, a lauth's dragons cover a range of ages,
important is hidden in the sage's notes. ensuring that the lauth's traditions outlive its old
2 A dragon of the Chamber is convinced that drag est members.
onmarked Humanoids on Eberron have echoes on Engraved Wards. The arcane markings carved
other worlds of the Material Plane, and seeks ways into hidecarved dragons' scales are magical protec
tions, intended to make the dragons more resilient
to identify them.
against the threats they might face in carrying out
3 A dragon of the Chamber draws the characters
the lauth's purpose. The longer dragons stay with a
from one Material Plane world to another, trying to
lauth, the more wards they receive. Most hidecarved
glean information about the Prophecy by examin
dragons have one of these wards plus an additional
ing the relationship between the two worlds.
ward for each age category above wyrmling. You
4 A member of the Chamber seeks to hire the charac can roll for these effects on the Hidecarved Wards
ters to explore a dungeon that was recently discov table or choose effects as you wish.
ered behind a sigil-inscribed stone seal.
HIDECARVED WARDS
5 A member of the Chamber believes that one of the
characters could serve as "the Child of Winter" (or d6 Ward Effect
some similar title) mentioned in the Prophecy and Immutability. The dragon is immune to any spell or
tries to manipulate the character into bringing the effect that would alter its form.
terms of the Prophecy to pass. 2 Inscrutability. The dragon is immune to any effect
6 A Fiend tries to trick the characters into slaying a that would sense its emotions or read its thoughts.
dragon belonging to the Chamber. Wisdom (Insight) checks made to ascertain its in
tentions or sincerity have disadvantage.
HIDECARVED DRAGONS
3 Magic Resistance. The dragon has advantage on
On worlds across the Material Plane, dragons
saving throws against spells and other magical
.
gather in small communities of three to five called
effects. ..
lauths. These dragons share a common territory
and hoard, live under a strict code of discipline, and 4 Damage Resistance. The dragon has resistance to
devote themselves to a common goal. Their most bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage from •
notable feature, though, is their practice of carving nonmagical attacks.
arcane sigils of protection into their scales. 5 Additional Resistance. The dragon has resistance
Common Purpose. Dragons most often form a to one type of damage. Roll a d8, rerolling if you
lauth when they identify a shared goal whose com get a damage type the dragon is already resistant
pletion requires the sustained effort of a diverse
or immune to: l, acid; 2, cold; 3, fire; 4, lightning; 5,
group of dragons. The Lauth Goals table offers a
necrotic: 6, psychic; 7, radiant; 8, thunder.
few examples.
6 Death Ward. The dragon can cast the death ward
spell on itself and regains the ability to do so after
LAUTH GOALS
a long rest.
d6 Goal
Support the establishment of a powerful empire to Mystic Markings. The sigils engraved in the
maintain order in the lauth's territory scales of a hidecarved dragon echo across the Ma
terial Plane similarly to how a dragon becoming
2 Bring about the downfall of a powerful empire
Undead does. When a dragon joins a lauth, the
3 End the influence of Aberrations originating in the
dragon's echoes on other worlds gain a measure of
Underdark
the magical protection from the dragon's engraved
4 Seek out and destroy hundreds of cursed magic markings. Some of those echoes accept this inex
items created by an ancient lich plicable boon without questioning it. Others investi
5 Destroy an archdevil, a demon prince, a powerful gate the mystery and might end up awakening their
Celestial, or an archfey whose extraplanar influence dragonsight and discovering the nature of the lauths
affecting them- perhaps eventually founding their
is altering the lauth's territory ,.
own lauths with other dragons in a similar situation.
6 Bring about (or prevent) the fulfillment of a proph
ecy uttered by an ancient dragon centuries ago
CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY 47
...
=== PAGE 49 ===
111DEC.ARVED DRAGONS ADORN THEIR
SC.ALES WITH MVSTIC. WORDS. INHERITORS OF THE FIRST WORLD
"Breathe, dragons: you are inheritors, / ruling the
wreck of the First World's destruction." To some
dragons, this closing couplet of "Elegy for the First
World" is not merely an exhortation to dominate the
Material Plane, but a call to recreate the original
world of the dragon gods. The draconic members
of an apocalyptic sect called the Inheritors of the
First World believe the cataclysm that destroyed the
original creation and brought the myriad worlds of
the Material Plane into being can be undone. In fact,
they teach that the Material Plane's worlds must be
destroyed and recombined so the creation can be
brought to its final, glorious purpose.
The goal of the Inheritors of the First World might
seem unattainable; at the very least, achieving it
would almost certainly require the intervention of
both Bahamut and Tiamat. But they would be op
posed by the countless gods who are deeply invested
in the Material Plane as it is, and the two primordial
dragons have not coordinated their efforts toward a
common purpose since before the destruction of the
First World. Still, the Inheritors of the First World
are extremely knowledgeable about the multiple
worlds of the Material Plane, the connections be
tween them, and means of traveling from one world
to another.
Awakening Dragonsight. The work of the Inher
itors of the First World consists largely of devel
oping dragonsight, which is latent in all dragons.
Leaders within the group have perfected multiple
techniques-from alchemical brews to elaborate
Adventure Hooks. The Hidecarved Dragons Ad
rites-to help spark the first flickering awareness of
venture Hooks table offers suggestions for how this
a dragon's echoes on other worlds. They freely per
order of dragons might get caught up in the affairs
form these techniques on any dragons who yearn for
of adventurers.
this birthright, believing that empowering dragon
sight even in dragons with no intention of joining the
HIDECARVED DRAGONS ADVENTURE HOOKS
order ultimately helps advance their cause. A dragon
d6 Adventure Hook who decides to be initiated into the sect develops
A hidecarved dragon hires the characters to under a basic awareness of multiple echoes and begins
take a quest in pursuit of the lauth's goal. to communicate directly with them in a process
akin to lucid dreaming by the time they undergo
2 A lauth becomes convinced that their goal de
initiation.
mands the destruction of the characters.
Any dragons with well-developed dragonsight, but
3 A lauth unexpectedly aids the characters' quest,
especially members of the Inheritors of the First
which aligns with the hidecarved dragons' goal. World, can have the following trait, representing
4 A lauth opposes the characters' quest, which is at the ability to call on the knowledge of their echoes
odds with the hidecarved dragons' goal. across the Material Plane:
5 Following reports of a dangerous dragon in the re Dragonsight Re11elation. The dragon can add half its proficiency
gion, the characters discover the dragon is part of a bonus, rounded down, to any ability check it makes that uses a
skill with which it lacks proficiency.
lauth whose goal is worth aiding.
6 A dragon asks the characters to help figure out why Reverence for Sardior. A central tenet of the In
heritors of the First World is that a reborn Sardior
mysterious arcane markings have suddenly ap
will ultimately inspire Bahamut and Tiamat to join
peared on the dragon's scales. Solving this puzzle
forces once again and return to the task of creation.
might mean journeying to another world or finding
Many members of the sect are gem dragons, who
a way to help awaken the dragon's dragonsight.
48 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
=== PAGE 50 ===
believe Sardior's fractured consciousness is embed FOLLOWERS
ded in their own minds, and who work to cultivate
dragonsight in other gem dragons. However, even
C-e-~in dva~n~ a&t /ike, the-~>ve, in
chromatic and metallic members of the group revere
the long-dead Ruby Dragon. Sardior is their once da~v of fov5"+H~ the-iv ovvn g-ande-vv
and future sovereign-a leader who has departed for
vn/~~ the-f ve, ~vvvovnde-d vvith be-i~
a time, but who will return to bring enlightenment,
comfort, and salvation to dragonkind. the-~ c..-an de-me-an. i>ve- fovnd, on the
Adventure Hooks. The Inheritors of the First
World Adventure Hooks table offers suggestions for c..onmv~, that tho~e- ~c..ovne-d b~ othe-v~
how characters might become involved with this
offon have, the- mo~t to fe-ad, v(
apocalyptic sect.
-fizban
INHERITORS OF THE FIRST WORLD
ADVENTURE HOOKS
Dragons often take on followers to help them ac
d6 Adventure Hook
quire treasure and protect their hoards and lairs.
A fleeing foe disappears into a magic portal linked Assigning such subordinates to a dragon is a matter
to another world of the Material Plane. When the of encounter and adventure design. As you craft
characters follow this enemy, they draw the atten an encounter, an adventure, or an entire campaign
tion of dragons who want to know more about the around a dragon, you can decide how many crea
world they came from. tures are in the dragon's service.
2 The lair of a gem dragon turns out to be a magical
DRAGON RELATIONSHIPS
nexus containing portals linked to the lairs ofthe
Some dragons rule sprawling criminal organiza
dragon's echoes on several other worlds.
tions devoted to plundering the surrounding region
3 The characters discover an enormous ruby deep in
and swelling the dragons' hoards. Others govern
the Underdark. When word of their find gets out,
peaceful and prosperous towns where taxes and
the gem becomes the target of thieves and eventu tariffs provide them a steady stream of income.
ally of dragons who believe it is the heart of Sardior Still others set themselves up as warlords, emper
and a key to the Ruby Dragon's return. ors, or gods.
4 A dragon offers to pay the characters handsomely if The sections that follow present a variety of re
they travel to another world. There, they must make lationships dragons could have to their followers
(whether the followers are aware their leader is a
contact with the dragon's echo and solve the mys
dragon or not). Each style of relationship suggests
tery of why their patron has been unable to learn
a variety of adventure possibilities, as shown on the
dragonsight.
Relationships and Adventures table at the end of
5 Priests or dragon servitors of Bahamut send the
this section.
characters to combat the Inheritors of the First
World, worried that any attempt to restore Baha BUSINESS OWNER
mut and Tiamat's primal creation will anger the A dragon might invest wealth into a business to
multiply the investment. The dragon's followers
gods and rekindle the ancient wars between drag
are employees, who might be exploited because
ons and Humanoids.
of their weakness relative to the dragon or treated
6 Dragons establish a permanent portal connecting
fairly because of the dragon's kindness. Employees
two worlds of the Material Plane, establishing an
who don't perform up to the dragon's standards are
exciting era of discovery and trade between them. released from service-whether that means being
But the longer the portal remains open, the larger sent off to find other jobs or becoming the dragon's
it grows, seemingly drawing the two worlds to next meal. Depending on the size of the commercial
gether into a catastrophic collision. enterprise, the dragon might have subordinates who
are responsible for certain aspects of the business.
These subordinates might be related to the dragon
(younger dragons or perhaps half-dragons), or sim
ply employees who have proven trustworthy and
resourceful.
CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY 49
=== PAGE 51 ===
COMPANION monarch. The dragon's word is law- but depending
Dragons sometimes interact with mortal folk as if on the dragon, this might be the law of a benevolent
they were equals-particularly dragons who enjoy autocrat with a cadre of wise advisors or of a dictato
taking on Humanoid form. They might create a fel rial tyrant who governs based on whim. Taxes might
lowship or collegial society and treat their compan be funneled into the dragon's hoard, but some drag
ions with kindness and respect. These allies are of ons in this position regard the collective wealth of
ten unaware that their activities are oriented around their empire as part of their hoard and feel no need
the dragon's purposes, becoming unwitting pawns to consolidate it in specific locations.
in the dragon's plans. Deep attachments might form A dragon emperor might accept fealty from lesser
between the dragon and these companions, who can sovereigns and nobles who govern parts of the
become disillusioned when the dragon's true nature realm in the dragon's name, or the dragon might
is revealed. install dragon or half-dragon offspring in the high
est echelons of government. Depending on the size
CRIME Boss of the domain, the dragon might have thousands or
A dragon takes charge of a criminal enterprise, even millions of loyal subjects.
accumulating wealth through illegal activities that An emperor might rule openly in dragon form,
might range from theft and racketeering to smug which discourages aggressive neighbors from
gling and illegal gambling. Like any other gang provoking the dragon's wrath. Often, though, drag
leader, the dragon has little tolerance for rivals and ons adopt a Humanoid guise to rule, constructing
none at all for disloyalty among minions. Various elaborate ruses (posing as their own children and
lieutenants-which might include younger dragons grandchildren, for example) that allow them to reign
or half-dragons related to the boss-might hold re across multiple generations.
sponsibility over particular segments of the criminal The size of a dragon's territory is irrelevant to the
enterprise. "emperor" role. A dragon who acts as a mayor for a
small frontier town has the same kind of relation
EMPEROR
ship with the populace as one who rules a conti
Rather than existing on the shadowy fringes of so
nent-spanning nation.
ciety, a dragon might rule a nation as an absolute •
·•
=== PAGE 52 ===
Goo for weaker creatures they see as family, regardless
Some dragons demand not just service but worship of their exact relationship to the creatures.
from their minions. Among Humanoid creatures, To outsiders, dragons in this sort of relationship
kobolds are most likely to treat their dragon patrons might be mistaken for pets or servitors. But dragons
as deities, since they typically see dragons as ideal never forget their own power and importance, even
ized versions of themselves. They bring sacrifices when helping other creatures, and dragons' "chil
of food and treasure to their dragon gods, indulge dren" might face serious consequences if they forget
in various forms of worship (including groveling who's in charge.
when evil dragons are involved), and create tales
PATRON
and hymns to stoke their deities' egos. But other Hu
Dragons might take on the role of patron, using a
manoids might also feel (or at least feign) religious
fraction of their tremendous wealth to support the
devotion to a dragon, sometimes even manifesting
arts, groups of freelance adventurers, or important
magical power as a result of their piety. (The dragon
causes. Such dragons' minions might include artists
blessed follower, described in chapter 6, is an exam
painting frescoes in their lairs, musicians compos
ple of a Humanoid manifesting such power.)
ing chorales for the dragons to enjoy, poets writing
Dragons can be benevolent patrons who genuinely
odes in praise of their draconic lieges, and adven
care for those who worship them, scheming manip
turers seeking priceless treasures to add to the
ulators who view devotion as a means of domination
dragons' hoards. Dragons who spend a lot of time
and control, or something in between. All dragon
in Humanoid form are often drawn to this role, and
gods, however, have devoted minions who are dif
their minions might have no idea that their generous
ficult to sway from their service. One key to this
patrons are actually dragons.
devotion is the fact that a dragon's power is more
If you want to have a dragon act as a patron for a
concrete than the power of most gods; the super
group of adventurers, look to the "Group Patrons"
natural fear inspired by a dragon's presence readily
chapter of Tasha's Cauldron of Everything. You can
translates into reverence among the followers.
use the information there to create a dragon filling
NOBLE this role in your campaign. Dragons naturally fall
Some dragons aspire to a life of luxury, surrounded into the category of "ancient being," as described
by minions whose primary purpose is to ensure in that chapter, but depending on their roles and
their every need is met immediately. A dragon living personalities, they might act more like another kind
in Humanoid form might actually claim a noble title of patron.
and hobnob with other members of the aristocracy.
TEACHER
However, dragons in this category often prefer to
The oldest dragons are deep wellsprings of
avoid the hassles of secrets and disguises, focusing
knowledge, drawing on vast experience that might
instead on extravagance-and demanding treasure
extend beyond a single world of the Material Plane
as tribute from nearby settlements. Their minions
to encompass multiple realities. Though some
are menial servants, responsible for bringing them
dragons hoard their knowledge like treasure,
food, keeping them comfortable, tending to their
others enjoy passing their knowledge on to other
