CHAPTER 5
DRACONOMICON
OW DO THE MINDSETS OF RED DRAGONS AND DRAGON ADVENTURES
gold dragons differ? Where do they prefer
Building on "Dragon Adventures" in chapter 3, this
to build their lairs, and what allies do
section starts with a collection of adventure hooks
they favor? This chapter, intended for the
that might bring characters into contact with a
Dungeon Master, explores the answers
dragon of a particular kind, whether in conflict or as
to many such questions. It explores in depth twenty
an ally or patron. Then, additional tables explore the
kinds of dragons, organized alphabetically:
relationships each kind of dragon has to other crea
Amethyst dragon* Faerie dragon tures of a similar challenge rating in their preferred
Black dragon Gold dragon environment. Use these tables to inspire adventures
Blue dragon Green dragon that feature dragons dwelling alongside other crea
tures, either as enemies or as allies.
Brass dragon Moonstone dragon*
Bronze dragon Red dragon
DRAGON LAIRS
Copper dragon Sapphire dragon*
This section expands on "Dragon Lairs" in chapter
Crystal dragon* Shadow dragon
4. If there is a map of a sample lair for a dragon of
Deep dragon* Silver dragon
that kind, it is accompanied by discussion of the
Dragon turtle Topaz dragon*
lair's important features. Many of these sections
Emerald dragon* White dragon
also describe additional lair actions a dragon can
*This dragon is introduced in chapter 6. use to exploit the lair's features, as well as addi
tional regional effects that might alter the landscape
USING THE ENTRIES
surrounding the lair.
For each dragon's entry in this chapter, you'll find You can adjust the scale on the lair maps to suit
information about crafting personalities, inspiration the needs of the dragon lairing there. If you use
for building adventures, details about lairs, and these maps for a wyrmling's lair, you might set the
ideas about the kinds of treasures that dragon fa scale to 5 feet per square, but for an ancient dragon
vors. Scattered throughout are maps of dragon lairs or a greatwyrm, you might need to go as high as 20
you can plunder for your adventures. feet per square to give the dragon room to move.
CREATING A DRAGON DRAGON TREASURES
Use the tables in this section in conjunction with Each entry ends with a discussion of the kinds of
"Roleplaying Dragons" in chapter 3 to craft dis treasures the dragon favors, including a table of art
tinctive dragon characters. Most of the personality objects you can use to expand on the information
traits and ideals align with the general nature of in "What's in a Hoard?" in chapter 4. The items
the dragons, but the tables also include examples of shown on these tables can represent art objects of
atypical dragons. any value, depending on their materials, quality, and
For dragons who do not have spellcasting ability, history. For example, a small bronze bust might be
this section also includes suggested spells to give worth 25 gp, while a large bust crafted from plati
a dragon if you want it to be a spellcaster. A table num and emeralds could be worth 7,500 gp.
shows the spells a typical dragon knows, along with
DRAGONS OF LEGEND
the spell save DC for those spells. The dragon can
cast each listed spell once per day, requiring no ma Sidebars throughout this chapter highlight famous
terial components and using Charisma as the spell dragons of different kinds. Many of these legend
casting ability. ary dragons are almost godlike in stature, known
and respected on multiple worlds across the Mate
rial Plane.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 75
=== PAGE 77 ===
AMETHYST DRAGONS AMETHYST DRAGON IDEALS
d6 Ideal
Balance. Everything is a complex interaction of
I onu:- (.;ovgit life- aciviu:- from an forces that must be kept in a delicate and carefully
maintained balance. {Neutral)
ame-th~(.;t civa5°n vvho (.;pwa/iz.e,cJ in that
2 Knowledge. We are the whole of creation, seeking to
(.;ovt of thi~ I told he,v all pavv(.; ancJ
M~ understand itself. (Any)
vnvvanfocJ be-haviov(.;, ancJ (.;he, pv~e,.,vibe,ci 3 Self-Improvement. I am a complex gem, and I con
the- b~t e-lixiv: 11Stop cioins---tho(.;e, stantly polish and refine my many facets to make
the whole that much more perfect. {Any)
thi~!>' I (.;-n// think- bac..k on that vi(.;it in
4 Responsibility. Having knowledge and power gives
tv~ins---TIM~. one a responsibility to those who have less of either.
(Lawful)
-Pr.z.ban
5 Noble Obligation. My superior experience, intellect,
and insight give me a duty to mediate disputes
Use the tables, map, and other information in this when I can. (Good)
section to craft unique encounters with amethyst
6 Power. Knowledge is power, power must be used,
dragons. Amethyst dragon stat blocks appear in
and I use it. Your concerns are irrelevant. {Evil)
chapter 6.
AMETHYST DRAGON ADVENTURES
CREATING AN AMETHYST DRAGON
The Amethyst Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
Use the Amethyst Dragon Personality Traits and
suggestions for stories and adventures involving am
Amethyst Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your por
ethyst dragons.
trayal of distinctive amethyst dragon characters.
AMETHYST DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
AMETHYST DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS
d8 Adventure Hook
d8 Trait
An amethyst dragon seeks a rare type of crystal
I am never so content as when contemplating the
found in the domain of a territorial stone giant clan.
beauty and wonders of the multiverse.
2 A coven of hags seeks to reclaim its hag eye, which
2 I am a sworn protector against the depredations
rests within an amethyst dragon's hoard.
of the Far Realm, and I will root out its corruption
wherever it may arise. 3 An amethyst dragon magically disables all telepor
tation within a thousand miles of their lair. Govern
3 What use is vast knowledge or insight if it is not
ments within that area seek emissaries who can
shared with those who can appreciate it?
negotiate an end to the restriction.
4 Although some are fascinated by words, I think
4 An amethyst dragon recruits a group of adventurers
numbers are the true foundations of creation.
to psychically trade bodies with adventurers from
5 To experience a thing is to truly understand it. Di
another world, so that each can carry out certain
rect and personal experience is the most valuable
tasks before swapping back.
form of knowledge.
5 A cult devoted to a Great Old One of the Far Realm
6 I see a far more kaleidoscopic reality than you do ...
seeks an alien monolith that can summon its mas
or than any of your selves do, really.
ter, but the site is guarded by an amethyst dragon.
7 It is not my place to interfere. I merely seek to ob
6 An amethyst dragon wyrmling is actually the tempo
serve, learn, and understand.
rally displaced form of an ancient amethyst dragon
8 With a true understanding of metaphysics, anything
who already exists in the same time line.
is possible-including the creation of a more or
7 An amethyst dragon seeks the means to plant spe
derly and perfect cosmos than this one.
cial crystals that will allow the dragon to magically
coexist in multiple places at once across the world
during a rare celestial alignment.
8 An amethyst dragon is fusing with their echoes on
other worlds. They all hope to ascend to godhood,
perhaps recreating or replacing Sardior.
76 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 78 ===
CONNECTED CREATURES d8 Connected Creatures
Amethyst dragons are generally aloof creatures,
3 The Enlightened Dragon Master of an isolated mon
dwelling in isolation for long periods of time and
astery is, in fact, an adult amethyst dragon.
rarely cultivating connections with other creatures.
4 An adult amethyst dragon is at war with a beholder
When they do connect with others, it is most often
for intellectual and philosophical pursuits or to that has moved into the dragon's domain.
fulfill some arcane purpose involving the dragons' 5 Xorn serve as lookouts and spies for an adult ame
echoes across the worlds. thyst dragon who rewards them with gems.
6 To repay a favor long owed to a monastery of githze
AMETHYST DRAGON WYRMLING
rai warrior-monks, an adult amethyst dragon sends
CONNECTIONS
them aid against a mind flayer colony.
d6 Connected Creatures
7 An apostate community of githyanki follows the tu
An amethyst dragon wyrmling is in the care of a
telage of an adult amethyst dragon, who safeguards
cloistered religious order of scribes.
their creche on the Material Plane.
2 A half-amethyst dragon cares for an amethyst
8 The crystal-infused clay near an adult amethyst
dragon wyrmling sibling after the disappearance of
dragon's lair is ideal for the creation of clay golems,
their dragon parent.
and the dragon can perceive everything those go
3 A violet faerie dragon is the playmate and guardian lems do.
of an amethyst dragon wyrmling.
4 An amethyst dragon wyrmling lives alone in a lair, ANCIENT AMETHYST DRAGON CONNECTIONS
cared for by a cadre of animated objects. d4 Connected Creatures
5 A cloister of flumphs protects an amethyst dragon A yuan-ti cult known as the Serpents of the Dream
wyrmling while feeding on the wyrmling's excess ing City draws power from an ancient amethyst
psionic energy. dragon, which the cultists keep in eternal slumber
6 A circle of druids looks after an amethyst dragon with braziers of enchanted smoke.
wyrmling lairing in the circle's mountain tarn. 2 A rogue purple worm swallowed a large portion of
an amethyst dragon's hoard before burrowing back
YOUNG AMETHYST DRAGON CONNECTIONS into the deep Underdark. The dragon has a magic
d6 Connected Creatures crystal that can trace the worm's movement.
A myconid community dwells in tunnels near a 3 An ancient amethyst dragon is able to awaken
young amethyst dragon's lair, and its members psionic potential in others, and many of the greatest
telepathically commune with the dragon and any psi warriors in history were the dragon's students.
visitors in the lair from time to time. 4 After centuries guarding the world against incur
2 A young amethyst dragon and a githzerai zerth sions from the Far Realm, an ancient amethyst
travel together, learning about the multiverse. dragon has been corrupted by aberrant influences
3 A young amethyst dragon wants to take over the and now leads a cult the dragon once opposed.
cavern lair of a hydra.
4 A deep pool in a young amethyst dragon's lair ELDENSER THE LURKER
Contradictory tales told throughout the Forgotten
leads to the underground domain of an aboleth the
Realms are unclear about whether or not the ancient
dragon has been seeking to eliminate.
amethyst dragon Eldenser still lives, largely because of
5 A young amethyst dragon and a cloud giant regu the behavior that earned him the epithets "the Lurker"
larly host each other to play strategy games. and "the Worm Who Hides in Blades." Obsessed with
observing the world and its creatures, Eldenser devel
6 Pegasi nesting in the mountain heights are under
oped magic that allows his mind to inhabit the blade of
the protection of a young amethyst dragon. a weapon after his death. He exists now as a draconic
shard (described in chapter 6).
Eldenser prefers the role of silent observer to doing
ADULT AMETHYST DRAGON CONNECTIONS
anything that might give away his presence. In this
d8 Connected Creatures
fashion, he has inhabited countless weapons over long
Merfolk dwelling near an adult amethyst dragon's years, including many belonging to famous adventur
lair are under threat from sahuagin raiders. ers whose exploits the dragon has seen firsthand.
2 Clusters of shriekers serve as a warning system in
the tunnels of an adult amethyst dragon's lair.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 77
=== PAGE 79 ===
, '
AMETHYST DRAGOtf LAIR
MAP 5,1
Upper
caves
·-
,•
., ......
..
.
. ...
1,,
'•.
Main
' caves
11 -
1 square = 10 feet
78 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 80 ===
AMETHYST DRAGON LAIRS AMETHYST DRAGON TREASURES
Amethyst dragons prefer lairs near water, ideally Amethyst dragons often collect crystals and gems,
mountain lakes, where they take advantage of ex particularly their namesake stones, in raw, polished,
isting caves and tunnels. A lair behind a cascading or cut forms. They have less interest in coins and
waterfall is ideal, and often part of that lair is sub precious metals, although many have a fascination
merged, allowing the dragon to rest in the water and with metal items that have a silvery finish.
cultivate the fish that are their preferred food. Amethyst dragons favor treasures with partic
Amethyst dragon lairs frequently exhibit or ular scholarly or philosophical value as a part of
develop large and beautiful clusters of amethyst their hoard, including fine books, scrolls, or carved
crystals, including massive cathedral geodes split tablets; tapestries or woven "tomes" of embroi
open to show their contents and clusters of crystal dered cloth; complex scientific instruments; and
points more than a foot in diameter that extend six religious icons or objects. They are fond of unique
to ten feet from the interior stone surfaces of the and unusual art objects, especially those connected
lair. These crystals resonate with the dragon's pres to far-off or long-lost cultures, other planes of ex
ence, and glow with a soft inner light. The older the istence, or other worlds-and of magic items that
dragon, the deeper the purple color of the crystals. allow movement between those planes or worlds.
The odd spatial nature of an amethyst dragon's lair
AMETHYST DRAGON LAIR FEATURES can sometimes cause items to transpose between
The amethyst dragon lair shown in map 5.1 is set
one dragon's hoard and the hoards of the dragon's
beneath a mountain ridge between two deep tarns,
echoes, allowing for treasures with a surprising
with streams flowing down toward the lowlands.
range of origins.
The lair has the following features:
Entrances. Two cave entrances provide access to AMETHYST DRAGON ART OBJECTS
the lair, one in the rock face just above one tarn d8 Object
and one below the surface of the other tarn. The A complex orrery of the planes of existence made of
dragon uses the underwater passage as a secret
engraved movable plates of precious metals and set
entrance and emergency exit.
with gemstones
Main Caves. The lair is a complex of caves and
2 A two-foot-long rod of pale crystal that gives off
tunnels; the stone surfaces are smooth and wa
eerie sounds when touched, with the tone varying
ter-worn, and the air is cool and slightly damp.
up and down the length of the rod
Glowing Crystals. Large clusters of glowing ame
thyst crystals grow out from the walls and ceiling, 3 A life-sized human skull carved from a single piece
casting dim light in a 30-foot radius. of crystal, including a hollow interior
Chimneys. Two chimneys connect the main caves 4 A beautifully engraved gong, 3 feet in diameter, sus
to the three chambers above. Each chimney ap
pended from an ornate, inlaid frame
pears to continue up through the ceiling of the up
5 A crystal singing bowl etched with mantras in Gith,
per level and down through the floor of the lower
accompanied by an inlaid wooden mallet
level, but the dragon's magic warps space within
the lair. Moving up past the upper level brings a 6 A beautifully illuminated treatise on the planes of
creature to the lower level again, while moving existence, bound in ebony covers with metal corner
down from the lower level brings a creature to the caps and a cover boss set with polished gems
upper level. A creature or object dropped down 7 An etched crystal that projects a star map showing
one of the chimneys continues falling endlessly
an unfamiliar star field and constellations when set
unless it or some outside force has the means to
on top of a light source
slow or stop it. This property of the lair vanishes
8 A ring in the shape of a coiling dragon, with tiny
after ldlO days if the dragon dies.
gemstones for eyes
Upper Caves. The dragon most often sleeps in
the largest upper chamber of the lair. The drag
on's hoard is divided between that area and the
chamber at the opposite end of the upper level.
The magic of the lair sometimes makes it appear
as though the dragon were sleeping amid both
caches, creating the impression that two dragons
dwell here.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 79
=== PAGE 81 ===
BLACK DRAGONS
d6 Ideal
3 Cunning. Destroying your foes without exposing
yourself to danger is an art. (Evil)
TiaMat ~pe-nt -the- Mo~t -liMe- e,.vaff-i~ he-v 4 Adaptability. It is not the most powerful, but the
most flexible who survive. (Chaotic)
blac.k dva~n. I vva~ ~abbe-v~~te-d at he-v
S Patience. There's no need to rush a poorly con
fnal pvodve,.t and ~v~te-d oh ~o Man1
structed plan when time is on your side. (Any)
a~v~tme-nt~, bvt at ~oMe- point, a pv~e,e,.t 6 Serenity. Observing a culture sliding into oblivion
along the trek of time puts life in perspective. (Any)
,~ ~1Mpl1 dve-.
-fizban
BLACK DRAGON SPELLCASTING
) ) Spell
Age Save DC Spells Known
Use the tables, map, and other information in
Young 13 blindness/deafness, create or destroy
this section to craft unique encounters with
black dragons. water
Adult 16 blindness/deafness, create or destroy
CREATING A BLACK DRAGON
water, plant growth
Use the Black Dragon Personality Traits and Black Ancient 19 blindness/deafness, create or destroy
Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal of dis water, insect plague, plant growth
tinctive black dragon characters, and use the Black
Dragon Spellcasting table to help select spells for a
BLACK DRAGON ADVENTURES
spellcasting dragon.
The Black Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
suggestions for stories and adventures involving
BLACK DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS
black dragons.
d8 Trait
I demonstrate my brilliance through the cruel sub
BLACK DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
tlety of my actions.
d8 Adventure Hook
2 Watching the works of lesser beings crumble and
A black dragon recently took control of a band of pi
fall into ruin fills me with joy.
rates and their backwater hideout. Emboldened, the
3 I never confront a threat directly when deceit and
pirates have started raiding nearby shipping lanes.
skulduggery are available options.
2 A conflict-averse black dragon is secretly spraying
4 Subjugating others is preferable to destroying them.
an alchemical defoliant on local farmland to push
Thralls make life so much more pleasant.
people living in the area away from the dragon's lair.
S I will go to great lengths to obtain deadly new magi The resulting famine is devastating the countryside.
cal knowledge.
3 Rival realms are secretly being driven to war by the
6 Nothing lasts forever. But I promise to outlast you. machinations of a black dragon, who hopes to revel
7 I have witnessed the rise and fall of civilizations. in the resulting carnage.
What consideration does a creature as pitiful and 4 When swamplands shrink due to a prolonged
short-lived as you deserve? drought, two black dragons form a temporary alli
8 Collecting antiquities and learning why lost cultures ance to destroy a nearby town for more living space.
vanished are my reasons for existing. If you can help S The acidic bile of a black dragon is the only sub
me in that, I'll let you live. stance able to melt the lock of a despot's vault.
6 A potent artifact is rumored to lie in the ruins where
BLACK DRAGON IDEALS
a black dragon dwells.
d6 Ideal
7 A group of adventurers and a black dragon are
Envy. If the achievements of others cannot be hunting the same treasure in the ruins of a partially
eclipsed, they can always be torn down. (Evil) sunken city.
2 Acquisitiveness. Possessing what others covet is 8 A black dragon with epicurean tastes is poaching
immensely satisfying. (Any) game in a noble's hunting preserve at a frightening
pace.
80 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
I ....,.
=== PAGE 82 ===
CONNECTED CREATURES ADULT BLACK DRAGON CONNECTIONS
Black dragons prefer the company of creatures d8 Connected Creatures
that are easy to control and present little threat of
An adult black dragon has learned to domesticate
betrayal. Mindless Undead, shambling mounds, car
swamp-bred chimeras as guardians and has sold a
nivorous flora, Oozes, and Constructs make appeal
few of the creatures to local warlords.
ing servants, especially working in concert with a
black dragon's fiendishly clever traps. A black drag 2 A cult of assassins worships an adult black dragon
on's intelligent followers tend to worship draconic as an avatar of their deity. The dragon now uses the
majesty and typically include kobolds, troglodytes, cult to destabilize the local sovereign's rule.
lizard folk, and (more rarely) yuan-ti. 3 Ruins rumored to hold the treasury of a lost empire
are guarded by an elaborate network of ooze-based
BLACK DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS
traps designed by a restless adult black dragon.
d6 Connected Creatures
4 The appearance of a spirit naga in the domain of an
After breaking free from captivity at the hands of
adult black dragon encourages the dragon to study
a cocky mage, a cunning black dragon wyrmling
necromancy.
claimed the mage's amulet-and the suits of ani
5 An adult black dragon has hidden a cache of gems
mated armor the amulet controls.
in a dismal topiary maze filled with shambling
2 A band of troglodytes is cowed into serving a black mounds, traps, and noxious plant life, all for the
dragon wyrmling as bodyguards.
amusement of testing adventurers.
3 The recent appearance of a black dragon wyrmling 6 An adult black dragon has bound water elementals
has altered the local ecosystem, allowing various
to the task of bringing food to the dragon's lair.
types of blights to spread prodigiously and upset
7 A bullywug community seeks help to defeat an adult
nature's balance.
black dragon who has been feasting on the bully
4 A black dragon wyrmling is setting cunning traps wugs' domesticated giant frogs.
along local roadways, hoping to injure horses and
8 Two nations-one led by an adult black dragon
draft animals for easy butchering.
and the other by a yuan-ti abomination-are on
5 Kobolds dwelling under a tropical city serve as safe
the brink of joining forces to destroy a third nation.
crackers and tunneling burglars to amass treasure The threatened nation is recruiting adventurers to
for their beloved black dragon wyrmling master.
defend it.
6 A gnome relic hunter looting a long-abandoned
city strikes up an unlikely partnership with a black ANCIENT BLACK DRAGON CONNECTIONS
dragon wyrmling to plunder an archaeological dig. d4 Connected Creatures
An ancient black dragon, after studying blasphe
YOUNG BLACK DRAGON CONNECTIONS
mous texts dedicated to alien gods, issues a warn
d6 Connected Creatures ing that a corrupted planetar will soon fall to earth
A young black dragon with a talent for alchemy has like a meteor in the fens outside a great city's walls.
weaponized the spores of a myconid colony. 2 An illithid community has spent nearly a millennium
2 A merrow war band has negotiated an alliance with raising and preparing a black dragon to become an
a young black dragon to sack a nearby trading port. elder brain dragon (described in chapter 6), so the
3 A pack of ghouls infesting a necropolis serve as a elder brain can wreak ruin upon its rivals.
young black dragon's bodyguards and enforcers. 3 The decades-long machinations of an ancient black
4 A young black dragon has cultivated an awakened dragon and an evil archmage are nearing fruition. If
carnivorous plant (use the awakened tree stat block) their pact succeeds, they will unleash devastation
as a lair guardian and has been abducting travelers on a continental scale.
to feed the plant creature. 4 An ancient black dragon rules a vast, decadent city
5 Lizardfolk worshiping a young black dragon have built on artificial islands within a polluted lake. The
been raiding a local fishing community. site is threatened with destruction by an enraged
6 A young black dragon has struck up a mutual assis archdruid-but destroying the city means thou
tance pact with a roper that haunts the ruins out sands of innocents will die.
side the dragon's lair.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 8r
=== PAGE 83 ===
BLACK DRAGON LAIRS a chipped staircase that climbs to a second floor
and then ends in midair before reaching the crum
Black dragons prefer to lair in swamps and jun
bling third level. Mold-covered friezes of knights
gles-the more dismal and fetid, the better. Within
kneeling before angelic beings line the stairwell.
those environs, they favor ruins for their defensibil
Tower Top. The dragon's true hoard is kept safely at
ity and dreary aesthetic.
the top of the crumbling tower, where the dragon
When choosing their lairs, black dragons are fond
enjoys perching and staring out into the gloom.
of locations that are naturally constraining and con
Intruders who can't fly must scale the sheer, slimy
founding. Whether adventurers seeking the dragon
walls of the tower (either from outside or from
must wind their way through the roots of an ancient
the interior of the second floor), braving whatever
mangrove swamp or brave a trap-filled boggy ruin,
traps might be in store if they hope to claim the
the experience promises to be a deadly affair.
dragon's real treasures.
BLACK DRAGON LAIR FEATURES
ADDITIONAL LAIR ACTIONS
The black dragon lair shown in map 5.2 is a derelict
At your discretion, a legendary (adult or ancient)
chapel, lost to time in a gloomy fen. The building's
black dragon can use one or more of the following
wooden framing rotted away long ago, leaving a
additional lair actions while in its lair:
looming skeleton of lichen-covered stone and a lone
tower. The lair has the following features: Filth Burst. The dragon chooses a point on
the ground it can see within 120 feet of it. A
Swampy Lake. Abutting the chapel is a swampy
20-foot-radius, 20-foot-high cylinder of watery filth
lake where the dragon sleeps. The foul water
centered on that point erupts from the ground un
stinks of dead fish and rot, while the dense foliage
til initiative count 20 on the next round. Each crea
and scraggly trees along the shoreline writhe with
ture in the cylinder when it appears or that ends
scuttling, slithering fauna. A thick blanket of fog
its turn there must make a DC 15 Constitution
part of the dragon's corrupting influence-adds a
saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) poison damage on a
claustrophobic feel to the lair.
failed save, or half as much damage on a success
Chapel Floor. Columns of clammy stone jut like
ful one. The cylinder is difficult terrain.
ribs from the chapel's exposed floor, as if in mock
Grasping Muck. Tendrils of roiling muck extend
ery of the sanctity of this once-holy place.
from the dragon's lair to grasp up to three crea
Underground. Twin staircases in the main hall
tures of the dragon's choice that it can see within
descend to a partially flooded crypt. Five trapped
the lair. A targeted creature must succeed on a DC
stone sarcophagi rise above the waterline, their
15 Strength saving throw or be restrained until
lids depicting armored warriors whose faces have
initiative count 20 on the next round.
been scoured away by acid. Each sarcophagus
Noxious Gas. A bubble of swamp gas erupts in
holds a few coins and shiny baubles mixed with
a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on a point the
junk that appears to be treasure at first glance.
dragon can see within its lair. Each creature in the
In the tower basement, a fully submerged tunnel
area must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving
leads to the lake where the dragon sleeps.
throw or be poisoned for 1 minute. The target can
Chapel Tower. A swollen oak door, flanked by
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
worn carvings of noble warriors, opens into the
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
dank stone tower, which stands empty except for
REGIONAL EFFECTS
RHASHAAK Any of these effects might appear in the area around
Guardian of the cursed city of Haka'torvhak, the a black dragon's lair, in addition to or instead of the
black greatwyrm Rhashaak lives deep in the jun- effects described in the Monster Manual:
gles of Q'barra on the world of Eberron, where he is
worshiped as the incarnation of a god by numerous Ennui. Creatures that spend a year within 10 miles
kobolds, dragonborn, and lizardfolk. Rhashaak has of the dragon's lair are filled with listless despair.
existed for millennia as the primary guardian of the Grating Spies. Trilling, obnoxious birds, bugs, and
imprisoned Fiend Masvirik, who once held dominion
reptiles follow any Humanoid creatures unknown
over reptilian creatures.
to the dragon within 6 miles of the lair, imposing
Over time, Rhashaak has been tainted by the corrup
disadvantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks. The
tion he guards and has slowly succumbed to its evil.
Powerful wards keep Rhashaak bound to his fallen city, dragon can suppress this effect at will.
but his legions would pose a significant threat if Rha Rotting Domain. Stinging bugs are aggressive and
shaak were ever roused by settlers or explorers search the air is heavy with the odor of rot within 6 miles
ing his ruins. of the lair.
82 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 84 ===
BLACK DRAGON LAIR
MAP 5.2
Side view
1 square= 10 feet
Surface
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 83
=== PAGE 85 ===
BLACK DRAGON TREASURES BLACK DRAGON ART OBJECTS
Black dragons appreciate objects of cultural, mag dlO Object
ical, or scientific significance that originated from An elegant necklace owned by a beloved noble who
lost cuJtures. Knowing a relic they possess is cov disappeared years ago
eted by others because it presents a link to a lost
2 Stone carvings representing a pantheon of deities
past is what gives that relic its value. Black dragons
that passed from common knowledge long ago
also love conventional treasures such as gems (par
3 The lost secret to forging an alloy imbued with
ticularly opals), precious metals that don't corrode
arcane potential, etched on twelve metal disks the
easily, and stone sculptures.
Because their lairs are inevitably slimy and dank, size of dinner plates
if not outright flooded, black dragons rarely have 4 A sealed platinum flask containing the last known
cloth, wood, or paper items unless such items are aqua vitae created by a master dwarf distiller
stored in watertight containers. Black dragons
5 A ceremonial longsword with an embossed silver
versed in magic often record notes and rituals on
hilt and a blade of amber
bones, shells, and metal plates instead of paper or
6 A lavishly illustrated genealogy kept in a magically
parchment. These unusual works are art in their
sealed container that disputes a current monarch's
own right, each featuring rows of graceful Draconic
script etched with the dragon's own acid. right to the throne
Most black dragons keep their treasure well hid 7 Heretical religious symbols carved on a trio of gem
den and have a private viewing room for particularly stones the size of apples
prized possessions. Knowing that interloping infe
8 An elaborately carved mask representing a god of
riors were able to so much as see their hoard can
harvest and fertility
drive a black dragon to a state of rage.
9 Metal horn caps inset with gems, made for the
dragon by loyal cultists
10 A beautifully enameled urn holding the desiccated
heart of the dragon's former green dragon rival
84 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 86 ===
BLUE DRAGOftS
d6 Ideal
5 Display. One should never take risks or waste re
sources by using power if one can achieve the same
If I we-ve-n>t <;o platinvM, lc.J be- b/ve-. Not results merely by the threat of power. (Any)
a<; in <;acl ov clown. cQvite- the- oppo<;ite-. lc.J 6 Loyalty. I don't form bonds with those outside my
kindred often. But when I do, I am an unshakable
