CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY 31
=== PAGE 33 ===
IN SHAPE, S11.E, COLOR, ANO ORNAMENTATION.
DRAGON MANNERISMS d20 Mannerism
d20 Mannerism
13 Prone to uttering terrifying, guttural sounds, which
Rotates head from side to side when listening or are actually laughter
speaking 14 Enjoys mimicking Humanoid voices
2 Tail writhes constantly in a snakelike fashion 15 Dismisses modern cultures as historical curiosities
3 Slowly and constantly fans wings sure to collapse imminently
4 Lowers head to speak eye-to-eye to smaller crea 16 Has trouble discerning details of anything as small
tures-unless angry as Humanoids
5 Uses Draconic words and phrases even when 17 Sharpens claws or horns on nearby stone surfaces
speaking other languages 18 Manifests small signs of the breath weapon, such
6 Punctuates speech with bestial sounds-growls, as exhaling smoke rings, setting arc lightning danc
roars, croaks, chirps, or whistles ing over teeth, or blowing acid bubbles
7 Fiddles with tip of tail 19 Sighs restlessly, giving an impression of tremen
8 Absently chews on or picks at teeth with swords, dous boredom
spears, or lances 20 Deeply suspicious, treating all Humanoids encoun
9 Quickly forgets names and invents random nick tered as probable agents of a rival dragon
names instead
10 Burdens conversation with extensive historical con DRAGON BONDS
text, whether or not it's relevant dlO Bond
11 Constantly twitches tail-and occasionally pounces I treasure one particular item in my hoard-a gift
,.,. on it from a person I loved, who is long since dead.
12 Speaks an archaic form of Common (equivalent to 2 I am close to my siblings, whose lairs are nearby.
Shakespearean English) and doesn't understand I would go to great lengths to protect them-or
contemporary slang and idioms avenge them.
32 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
=== PAGE 34 ===
dlO Bond dlO Flaw or Secret
3 A nearby person intrigues me with fascinating 3 Given the opportunity, I eat to excess and then fall
questions and bizarre ideas. into a long, deep sleep.
4 I collect information about the worlds of the Mate 4 I would rather let my fearsome reputation scare
rial Plane, and I would love to visit another world away intruders than fight them off.
someday. 5 Other dragons would scorn me if they knew how
5 I am devoted to Bahamut or Tiamat and put their fondly I regard my minions. They're so cute!
interests ahead of my own. 6 I am terrified of creatures from the Outer Planes
6 I'm determined to destroy the adventurers who especially modrons.
slew my parent-and everyone connected to them. 7 Another dragon has sworn to find and destroy me.
7 I'm obsessed with attracting the attention of an 8 Humanoids are not ready to learn the horrible cos
other dragon. mic truths in the books in my hoard.
8 I feel an obligation to protect the creatures that in 9 The prospect of living for centuries more exhausts
habit my territory (except the ones I eat). me.
9 I am trying to collect an extremely rare set of price 10 I'm convinced that a version of me on a different
less treasures. world in the Material Plane is hoping to destroy me
10 I won't rest until I retrieve an item stolen from my and steal my hoard.
hoard.
How TO NAME YOUR DRAGON
DRAGON FLAWS AND SECRETS
Man~ Common phvac;<½ have- ovijnc; in
dlO Flaw or Secret
I find adventurers fearsome, and I'm convinced Pvac..onie,.. nam<½. c<0ive-at 8'o&~-moo&~/'
that I'll meet my doom at their hands one day.
1'9'od~ 8'od~ @'mdvopc;/ and c<~dU)o/::::,c;1
2 One item in my possession is worth as much as '
the rest of my hoard combined, and the fear that it all have- the-iv ovijnc; in the- name- of m~
might be stolen consumes me. vapvi~ovc; fvie-nd 0ia~lothmo~lthac;,
vvhoc;e:, dvaf¥'n bve-ath alc;o pvodvu-cJ a
bopp~, mmpe-t-~ tvne-.
-Przban
Some dragons' names resonate with power and
inspire terror: Ashardalon, Dragotha, Klauth, Khel
lendros, Malystryx, Vaskar. Others are intricate and
obscure, reflecting the grandeur of dragons' ancient
language: lngeloakastimizilian, Imvaernarhro,
K'rshinthintl, Claugiyliamatar.
Many dragons are better known by nicknames
and epithets. Klauth is commonly called Old Snarl,
and Khellendros is remembered as Skie and the
Storm over Krynn. lngeloakastimizilian is Icing
death, lmvaernarhro is Inferno, and K'rshinthintl
and Claugiyliamatar are called Cyan Bloodbane and
Old Gnawbones, respectively.
When naming a dragon, take whatever approach
appeals to you. But bear in mind that dragons need
memorable names, and if you or your players have
trouble pronouncing a name, it's likely to be quickly
forgotten-or jokingly abbreviated.
The Dragon Name Elements table provides Dra
conic morphemes that appear in dragon names.
CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY 33
=== PAGE 35 ===
You can combine these elements to form a dragon
name. For each element, roll a d20, then choose one
,.
of the four possible results from the table, or roll a
d4 to determine which column to choose from. If
you like, you can rearrange these elements and add
or drop letters to create a smoother flow or a more
dramatic sound. For nicknames, look for inspira
tion in the dragon's abilities, mannerisms, or most
famous acts.
DRAGON NAME ELEMENTS
d20 1 2 3 4
l Aeros Agha Akkan Alae
2 Andra Andusk Angkar Aradace
3 Arauth Arveia Aryz Atar
4 Auntyr Auth Bahr Bala
5 Calaun Ciym Claug Daerev
6 Dalagh Durg Eir Elden
7 Endar Ethar Fel Galad
8 Gaul Golos Guth lngeir
9 Ix lyliam Jhar Kerin
10 Lham Lothtor Malae Marun
11 Mere Miir Morn Nabal
12 Nur Nym Oloth Ontor
13 Othim Palar Raali Ragoth
..
14 Rith Rysear Saryx Ser
15 Skad Surr Thal Thanach
16 Thoth Thrax Thriin Tostyn Spells. The Monster Manual's variant rule about
17 Tratain Treori Turace Ualin making dragons innate spellcasters is an easy way
18 Umer Uryte Uxin Vaer to add variety to dragons without impacting their
challenge rating. Chapter 5 offers suggested spell
19 Vala Valos Vine Voar
lists for different kinds of dragons, but you can also
20 Vureem Waur Zundae Zyreph
choose spells to reflect the dragon's character. A
dragon who innately casts druid spells feels differ
CUSTOMIZING DRAGONS
ent from one who casts warlock spells. You can also
As discussed in the Dungeon Master's Guide, you
give a dragon spells of a higher level than the vari
can customize any dragon's stat block to reflect the
ant rule allows, but such a tweak might increase the
dragon's unique character. Minor changes such as
dragon's challenge rating-especially if those spells
those below are easy to make and have no impact on
deal damage or impose conditions on targets.
a dragon's challenge rating.
Languages. Most dragons prefer to speak Dra Other Traits and Actions. You can borrow traits
and actions from other monsters to add unique fla
conic but learn Common for dealing with allies
vor to a dragon. Consider these examples:
and minions. But given their high Intelligence and
long life span, dragons can easily learn additional Change Shape. You can decide that a dragon ac
languages. You can add languages to a dragon's quires this action at a younger age than usual, par
stat block. ticularly if you want to feature a dragon in Human
SkiJJs. Most dragons are proficient in the Per oid form in your campaign. The "Shape-Shifting"
ception and Stealth skills, and many dragons have section later in this chapter offers more informa
additional skill proficiencies. As with languages, you tion and inspiration. (See the metallic dragons in
can customize a dragon's skill list (even doubling the Monster Manual.)
their proficiency bonus with certain skills) to reflect Damage Absorption. You might decide that a red or
particular interests and activities. You can also give gold dragon is not only unharmed by fire damage,
a dragon tool proficiencies, particularly if the dragon but actually healed by it. (See the flesh golem in
spends time in Humanoid form. the Monster Manual.)
,,
34 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
=== PAGE 36 ===
Flyby. The dragon is an agile flier, quick to fly out WYRMLINGS
of enemies' reach. (See the peryton in the Mon Much like adventurers in the first tier of play (levels
ster Manual.) 1 to 4), dragons in their first five years of life are still
Mimicry. Impersonating characters or their allies figuring out their capabilities and their place in the
could be a fun trick for a crafty dragon. (See the world. Thus, wyrmlings often rely on adult dragons
kenku in the Monster Manual.) or other companion creatures for safety.
Rejuvenation. You might decide that dragons in Wyrmlings most often think on a local scale-
your campaign, being an essential part of the an area no larger than might be covered by a few
Material Plane, are nearly impossible to destroy. farmsteads or villages. If adult dragons are rearing
A dragon's life essence might be preserved in the a clutch of wyrmlings, the younger dragons often
egg from which it first emerged, in its hoard, or in divide the adults' territory among them. A single
a cavernous hall at the center of the world, just as wyrmling might thus hunt an area covering only a
a lich's essence is hidden in a phylactery. (See the few square miles, but the presence of one wyrmling
lich in the Monster Manual.) indicates that more might be nearby. On the other
Special Senses. Most dragons have blindsight and hand, wyrmlings without adult dragons in their lives
darkvision. You might upgrade blindsight to true might become allies or as captives of other kinds
sight, or you could give a dragon with a burrowing of creatures. Such wyrmlings are more likely to be
speed tremorsense. (See the introduction to the scattered from their nest mates.
Monster Manual.)
Tunneler. Any dragon with a burrowing speed WYRMLINC GOALS
could have this trait, moving through solid rock
d6 Goal
and leaving a tunnel in its wake. (See the umber
Establish independence from adult dragons (or
hulk in the Monster Manual.)
other powerful creatures)
LIFE SPAN 2 Acquire one valuable magic item or art object to
build a hoard around
3 Acquire minions who will bring food and treasure
Tr-1 not to b~ off~ nde-d wh~n a dva5°n
4 Establish dominance over other wyrmlings in the
di<;mi<;<;~ 10v a<; ivv~l01ant Re-m~mb~~
same brood
10v miff b~ d~ali~ with an individva/ 5 Secure a partnership with a more powerful creature
for safety
who hafohe-d into th~ wovld thY~ •
•
6 Find a good spot for a first independent lair
c..ivi(i~-tion<; a5°, and not ~v~v1 dva5°n
.
ha<; th~ wi<;dom to <;~ how Ion~ h~Yo~ •
c.-an e-ha~ th~ c.-ovv<;~ of hi<;tov1.
BLUE WvRMLING
-fizban
•
••
Some dragons can live for over a thousand years,
outlasting the rise and fall of nations-or even whole
civilizations. A dragon's perspective on the passage
of time is naturally quite different from that of more
short-lived folk. But just as characters expand their
priorities and perspectives as they advance in level,
so do dragons as they age.
The tables in this section suggest possible goals
that reflect the priorities of dragons at different
ages. Of course, a dragon's goals are shaped by
many additional factors, including alignment, ideals,
bonds, and flaws. So use these tables as a starting
point, but flesh out each dragon's goals as you de
velop a complete picture of the dragon's personality.
CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY 35
=== PAGE 37 ===
YOUNG DRAGONS ADULT DRAGONS
Young dragons in their first century of life are sim After their first century of life, adult dragons are
ilar in many ways to adventurers in the second tier mighty beings, akin to characters in the third tier
of play (levels 5 to 10), as they're beginning to come of play (levels 11 to 16). An adult dragon's influence
into their own among the most powerful creatures can extend across a whole region or continent.
of the Material Plane. Most adult dragons establish additional lairs to
This stage is when most dragons first establish expand their territory. These lairs are usually set
their own territory and lair. A young dragon's ter 50 to 75 miles apart, so the dragon can fly from one
ritory covers an area about 50 miles across. This to the next in a single day's travel. An adult dragon
is also when dragons start to form the magical ties typically hunts the area around one lair for a month
that bind them to both their hoards and the regions or more, then moves on to another lair. The dragon's
around their lairs. magical connection to a lair can transform the sur
Hunting dragons typically fly on a more-or-less cir rounding region, as represented by regional effects.
cular path out to one edge of their territory and back
in a day, traveling about 75 miles in total. Young ADULT DRAGON GOALS
dragons also use their hunting flights to keep tabs d6 Goal
on happenings within their territory and are keenly
l Find a good location for an additional lair
aware of other creatures whose territory neighbors
2 Acquire an artifact or a powerful magic item for the
or overlaps their own. A young dragon can become
hoard
a significant threat to a city or kingdom, either
through overt violence or subtle manipulation. 3 Establish a dynastic bloodline by producing young
4 Eliminate younger dragons who could become ri
YOUNG DRAGON GOALS vals or threats if they are allowed to grow older
d6 Goal 5 Transform a large region into an environment suit
Establish a lair and develop the land around it to able for the dragon's preferred sort of lair
maximize safety and good hunting 6 Develop dragonsight to pursue goals across multi
2 Amass as much treasure as possible ple worlds
3 Acquire magical wards to help protect the lair
4 Sabotage the efforts of other young dragons to es
tablish lairs in the local area
5 Earn the fear and respect of other creatures living
near the lair through displays of power
6 Secure the allegiance of loyal and powerful minions
36 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
• ..
•
=== PAGE 38 ===
ANCIENT DRAGONS
Dragons are considered ancient once they reach
eight hundred years of life, and many live for centu
ries more. Ancient dragons are among the mightiest
creatures in the multiverse, and like characters in
the fourth tier of play (levels 17 to 20), they are pow
erful enough to alter the fate of the world and upset
the balance of power across the planes of existence.
An ancient dragon typically has several lairs, each
one suffused with powerful magic. The regional ef
fects surrounding each of an ancient dragon's lairs
can combine to make that dragon's influence felt in
the natural world for hundreds of miles. In addition
to these magical effects, the dragon's ongoing pres
ence can have a profound impact on the region's
ecosystems, populations, and politics.
Greatwyrms. The oldest ancient dragons some
times transform into mythic creatures of godlike
power. These greatwyrms, described in chapter 6,
are nearly perfect avatars of draconic nature and
are so suffused with the magic of the Material Plane
that they are all but immortal. Many result from an
cient dragons ritually combining multiple echoes of
themselves into a single corporeal form, as Ashard
alon and Chronepsis are said to have done. Most
greatwyrms are at least twelve centuries old and ANCIENT BLUE DRAGON
have hoards worth millions of gold pieces, but they
are otherwise similar to other ancient dragons in
their goals and perspectives.
ANCIENT DRAGON GOALS DRAGONS AND TERRITORY
As dragons age, their sense of territory expands, and
d6 Goal
many establish multiple lairs across the region they
Avoid decline by becoming Undead or seeking call home. The larger a dragon's territory is, the more
magical alternatives to aging likely it is to edge up against or overlap the territory
of another dragon. The territory of an adult or ancient
2 Transcend the limits of physical existence on a sin
dragon often encompasses the territories of younger
gle world by uniting echoes across multiple worlds dragons, as long as the older dragon doesn't feel
or establishing a lair on another plane of existence threatened by the younger ones.
Considering the regions of a campaign world, an
3 Acquire a particular artifact, perhaps to complete a
area about 50 miles across, such as a barony or a small
set (all three parts of the Regalia of Evil, the Eye of
forest, might include the territory of a single dragon
Vecna and Hand of Vecna, and so forth) who's young or older.
4 Collect a complete set of artistic treasures, such as An area about 300 miles across-a kingdom or a
large geographical region-can contain the territories
all the paintings of a great master, manuscripts for
of two to three dozen dragons, as long as most of
a famed author's entire body of writings, or every
them are young. Only three or four adult or ancient
piece of jewelry made by a master artisan dragons are likely to occupy such a region. A single
5 Transform an entire world into an extreme envi adult dragon might range over a region that includes
the territories of up to six or eight young dragons
ronment suitable as a lair-a volcanic hellscape, a
(which might include the adult's offspring), but adults
frozen wonderland, an arid wasteland, or the like typically share territory with other adults only as mates
6 Destroy one or more gods as an act of vengeance or as members of a special alliance or organization.
A whole continent, about 3,000 miles across, might
or to ascend to godhood
include the territories of hundreds of young dragons
and dozens of adults, but rarely more than a handful of
ancient dragons.
,.. f
CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY 37
=== PAGE 39 ===
REPRODUCTION
dl0 Origin
5 Draconic Transformation. Enlightened non-dragons
Pva9'nc; ave- /,Ice, /iZ-dvdc;. The-1 e-xic;te-d (most often Humanoids) are transformed into
dragon eggs when they die, when they experience
be-fove- hvmanoidc; and wi II e-xic;t lo~
profound enlightenment, or when they undergo a
afre-v the-M, the-1 c.-an Manipvlate- ve-ali~~ ritual that might involve bathing in dragon blood
or being devoured by a dragon. Humanoids and
fabvi0 and the-1 tvan<;u,nd natvval /awe;!
dragons alike understand the transformation to be
Wait ... not like, /iZ-dvdc;. Ah! l---i/ce, majc.-. a transition into a higher state of existence.
-frzfan 6 Divine Origin. Only Bahamut and Tiamat can cre
ate dragon eggs-each egg is the result of divine
intervention.
Dragon reproduction varies from world to world in 7 Spontaneous Formation. Dragon eggs arise nat
the Material Plane and can vary further depending
urally in certain regions, often in underground
on the family, kind, or individual nature of the drag
veins of metal ore or gems for metallic and gem
ons involved. Humanoids observing dragons have
dragons, respectively, or in extreme environments
long assumed that their reproductive cycle resem
(volcanoes, arctic wastes, deadly swamps, and so
bles that of mundane reptiles- that two dragons of
forth) for chromatic dragons. The eggs might hatch
different sexes mate and produce a clutch of eggs.
on their own, or they might have to be unearthed
Sometimes, on some worlds, this is true, but dragon
reproduction covers a wide range of other possibili first by another creature, whether that's an adult or
ties. You can use the Origin of Dragon Eggs table to older dragon or a hapless miner.
choose a method of reproduction that holds true for 8 Parthenogenesis. An adult or older dragon can lay
all dragons on your world, to determine the origin of a clutch of eggs whenever the dragon feels ready
a specific clutch of eggs, or for anything in between. to rear a clutch of wyrmlings-or to impose that
responsibility on others.
ORIGIN OF DRAGON EGGS
9 Dragon Conclave. Five adult or older dragons of
dl0 Origin
different kinds come together to create a clutch
Spontaneous Reincarnation. When an adult or older
of eggs, with each giving up a bit of life energy as
dragon dies, one or more eggs form in the dragon's
part of the process. This clutch of eggs hatches five
decomposing body. These eggs might grow like
dragons of different kinds, depending on the drag
fungus as the body rots away, they could appear
ons making up the conclave.
among the ashes after the body is consumed by
10 Rejuvenation. An ancient dragon voluntarily enters
fire, or they might need to be mined out from a
a deep trance and eventually dies, leaving behind a
corpse that has turned to solid stone or metal.
single egg.
2 Seedlings of the First World. At the heart of the
Once an egg comes into being, it must mature
world (underground, or in a remote area of pristine
before it is ready to hatch into a wyrmling. Typically,
wilderness) stands a tree on which dragon eggs
an egg thrives only in an environment appropriate
grow like fruit. Once in a lifetime, each dragon feels
for a dragon of its kind- nestled in a pool of lava
an overwhelming urge to seek out this tree. After
for a red or gold dragon, in ice for a white or silver
finding it, the dragon must persuade its guardian
dragon, in rotting vegetation for a black or green
to relinquish one or more eggs.
dragon, in sun-heated sand for a brass or blue
3 Consuming Treasure. By eating a significant portion dragon, or in a storm-wracked sea cave or inhospi
of their own hoards, dragons cause themselves to table moorland for a bronze or copper dragon. Gem
lay clutches of eggs. dragon eggs generally incubate encased in rock
or in small caves. The incubation period for any
4 Magical Crafting. Mirroring the creative acts of
egg might range from 6 months to several decades
Bahamut and Tiamat, dragons craft their eggs
or longer.
through painstaking labor, then breathe the gift of
life into them.
38 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
..
' ,
=== PAGE 40 ===
HALF-DRAGONS
d6 Origin
Just as dragon reproduction is not necessarily a
3 True Love's Gift. Love occasionally blossoms be
straightforward biological process, half-dragons
tween dragons and creatures of other kinds, and
come into being through a variety of means. The
this life bond can result in half-dragon children.
Half-Dragon Origin table below offers examples.
Most half-dragons born of love are created as a
Dragons create half-dragon progeny for a wide
range of reasons. Some dragons create half-dragons magical gift.
to secure reliable minions. Others seed half-dragons 4 Blood Transformation. A creature that bathes in
around their lairs to make the area more dangerous or drinks the blood of a dragon can sometimes be
to interlopers. And on many occasions, half-dragons transformed into a half-dragon. A dragon might
simply appear spontaneously or are an acciden-
voluntarily offer some blood to bring this about, or
tal consequence of a dragon's magical power and
it could happen accidentally when a would-be drag
influence.
onslayer is splashed with dragon blood.
In some worlds, these same phenomena might
5 Cradle Favor. A dragon might bestow the gift of
explain the origins of dragonborn, kobolds, and per
draconic power on a newborn baby or an unborn
haps the draconic gifts described in chapter 2.
child-as either a blessing or a curse.
HALF-DRAGON ORIGIN 6 Hoard Thieves. The hoard of an older dragon is
d6 Origin imbued with that dragon's power. Those who steal
Regional Effects. The magical influence of a drag from such a hoard might transform into half-drag
on's lair causes half-dragons to spontaneously ons as that power leaches into them.
arise among the area's other creatures.
2 Forbidden Fruit. A dragon can cause a particular
tree to produce magical fruit. When eaten by a
creature able to bear children, the fruit causes the
creature to bear a half-dragon.
CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY 39
=== PAGE 41 ===
•
,
•
• . •
DEATH OF A DRAGON REGIONAL REVERSAL
•·
As described in the Monster Manual and discussed
in more detail in chapter 4, a dragon's presence al
g,
Whe-n I I dve-am of pa<;<;i~ m~ <;pivit ters the region around the dragon's lair. When the
into that with whie-h I have- had the dragon dies, those effects typically end immediately
or fade away over the course of several days. But a
mo<;t pvofovnd e-xpe-vie-nc..«. The- fvc;t traumatic death sometimes extends negative effects
throughout the region. These can include instanta
thi~ that c..ome,<; to mind ic; a c.-avame-1
neous effects as well as lingering magic that persists
rox~
fve-ae,,/e, from the- Pvc..k. Tave-vn. Yvm! for ldlO days, as in the following examples:
-rizban Fouled Water. Water within 6 miles of the lair
changes color and is fouled for ldlO days.
Restless Sleep. Any creature that sleeps within 6
Dragons are intimately bound up with the fabric miles of the lair is troubled by nightmares for the
of magic that undergirds the Material Plane. As a next ldlO days.
result, the death of any dragon is an event of tre Trembling Earth. An enormous tremor shakes the
mendous significance-and those who bring about a earth within 6 miles of the lair.
dragon's death are often changed forever. Wildlife Changes. Creatures previously attracted by
Some sages describe dragons as being akin to the dragon's presence undergo sharp behavioral
knots in the fabric of magic- concentrations of changes, perhaps attacking any creatures they see
power in material form. When a dragon dies, that or beginning a mass migration away from the lair.
knot is undone, sometimes resulting in a surge of Winds of Change. The weather within 6 miles of
magical energy. You can use the Dragon Death the lair changes dramatically.
Throes table to help you decide what happens when Withering Burst. Ordinary vegetation within 1 mile
a dragon dies. Characters who slay a dragon are of the dragon's lair blackens and shrivels.
often on their last legs when the dragon finally suc
cumbs, so if an effect is likely to kill a character, roll PASSING THE MANTLE
When a dragon dies, the power enfleshed in the
again or choose a less dangerous result.
dragon doesn't just disappear from the world. Over
time, it disperses, but in the moments immediately
DRAGON DEATH THROES
surrounding the dragon's death, it can be passed on
d6 Effect
to others-or claimed. Sometimes (as discussed in
The dragon immediately uses one of its lair ac
"Reproduction" above) a dragon's death gives rise
tions, centering the effect on itself. For example,
to an egg, transferring the dragon's power directly
a fallen black dragon and any characters around it to a new generation. In other cases, a dragon at the
might be pulled into a nearby pool of water, and brink of death invests power into another creature
a copper dragon's body might be swallowed sud usually a dragon, but sometimes a sovereign, a sage,
denly in mud. or an adventurer. Moreover, those who slay a dragon
could seize the dragon's power.
2 The dragon uses its breath weapon one last time.
The benefit conferred by this transfer of power is
3 The dragon's body transforms into stone, metal,
up to you. It might include one of the draconic gifts
lava, ice, or mist. Or the body dissipates, leaving
described in chapter 2 of this book, or a charm or
behind only a transformed heart or other organ.
blessing from the Dungeon Master's Guide. You can
4 Roll on the Wild Magic Surge table in the "Sor also use the supernatural gifts in Mythic Odysseys
cerer" section of the Player's Handbook, re rolling ofTheros or the Dark Gifts in Van Richten's Guide
any inappropriate result. to Ravenloft as benefits (with definite drawbacks, in
S A surge of life energy erupts from the dragon, the case of Dark Gifts).
Investiture. A dying dragon might willingly pass
causing each creature within 120 feet of the body to
on power in different ways. The most common
gain the benefit of finishing a long rest.
6 The body is drawn through a portal to the lair of
one of the dragon's echoes on another world, in
creasing that echo's power.
40 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
=== PAGE 42 ===
process is for the recipient to inhale the dragon's UNDEATH
dying breath-which often involves being subjected
to at least a diminished form of the dragon's breath
weapon. A gem dragon might psionically implant I've- ne-ve-v Me-t a c..-ve-afvve- I cJicJn't love-.
a gemstone in the recipient's body that carries the
Bvt I have- Me-ta few I cJicJn't want
dragon's power. A dragon might instead lay a claw
on the recipient or bequeath a piece of treasure as alive-.
an embodiment of the transferred power.
-fizban
Body and Blood. When a dragon dies a violent
death, the dragon's power might linger in the corpse
for a short time. Drinking or bathing in the dragon's
Despite their incredible life spans, some dragons
blood; sleeping entombed in the carcass; or consum
pursue undeath to extend their existences. Others
ing the dragon's heart, brain, eyes, breath-producing
stumble into undeath unwillingly or unwittingly.
organ, or muscle can be an effective way of claiming
Either way, an Undead dragon is a force to be
the fallen creature's magical might. Using a drag
reckoned with.
on's corpse this way might be a trial in itself, as the
Dracoliches are created by cultists or necroman
lingering energies in the body can cause serious
cers who either persuade or trick a dragon into un
injury even after the dragon's death.
dergoing a foul ritual. In the world of the Forgotten
Automatic Transfer. It's also possible for a drag
Realms, this ritual originated with the Cult of the
on's power to transfer immediately and automati
Dragon, whose teachings (based on a mistranslated
cally to creatures that participate in the dragon's
fragment of ancient prophecy) maintain that "dead
death or that are present when the dragon dies. A
dragons will rule the world entire." The cult thus
burst of power might emanate from the dragon at
creates dracoliches as a step toward achieving that
the moment of death, affecting each creature within
particular vision of a future paradise. Similar rites
300 feet of the body. Or a fragment of power might
exist on other worlds, whether spread by cultists
enter every creature that has dealt damage to the
from Faen'.in, invented independently, or discovered
dragon over the course of the dragon's life.
by dragons who have dracolich echoes on Faerun.
=== PAGE 43 ===
Chapter 6 details three additional kinds of dra ECHOES ACROSS THE WORLDS
conic Undead. A hollow dragons comes into being
when a metallic dragon gives up mortal life so a
fragment of life essence can linger as an eternal It ta~ no addi-tional wov/c to be, infnifo.
guardian of a precious treasure or knowledge. Dra
conic shards are lingering psychic projections of ~ a <;pide-ir <;~ thirovj, all it<; e,~e,<; 1
psionic gem dragons. And dragons can also linger dira~n<; <;imp/~ ave-, onc.-e, and man~ -time,<;.
after death as ghost dragons.
-rizban
Whatever form an Undead dragon takes, the
creature's transformation ripples throughout the
Material Plane. Every dragon has echoes on other
Dragons' unique connection to the magic of the Ma
worlds, and when one dragon violates the natural
terial Plane and the history of the First World gives
cycle of life and death, that dragon's echoes are of
them a mysterious link to other dragons across
ten affected- particularly in the case of dracoliches.
the myriad worlds of the Material Plane. In theory,
A dracolich's echoes suffer a wasting affliction that
every chromatic, metallic, and gem dragon that has
spreads out from the dracolich like a contagion. Af
ever lived has had a unique echo on every world of
flicted dragons grow increasingly violent and cruel,
the Material Plane. Some of those echoes are very
and the physical deterioration they experience from
similar to each other, but others are more radically
aging accelerates. This wasting can even drive an
different.
affected dragon to seek out undeath.
You can use the Dragon Echo Characteristics
The Undead Dragon Adventure Hooks table trans
table to help you decide what aspects of a dragon's
lates some of these ideas into inspiration for adven
echo are similar to the dragon you know and which
tures revolving around Undead dragons.
are different. You can then use the other tables in
this chapter (including the Dragon Appearance,
UNDEAD DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
Dragon Mannerisms, Dragon Bonds, and Dragon
d6 Adventure Hook
Flaws and Secrets tables), as well as the tables of
