lairs, and warding off intruders. One or more of
creatures. Such dragons might establish schools or
these servitors might have the responsibility of man
monasteries, take on individual students or groups
aging the rest of a dragon noble's staff on the drag
of disciples, or pose as Humanoid scholars to teach
on's behalf, but even such a steward has little auton
in universities. These dragons might believe that ed
omy and must cater to the dragon's every whim.
ucating lesser creatures is the responsibility of the
PARENTAL FIGURE great. Others want a higher class of minion and be
Some dragons treat their followers and minions lieve education is the best way to achieve that. Still
like their children. These followers might be a drag others simply enjoy teaching or believe the world is
on's devoted dragon or half-dragon offspring, but improved by having an educated populace.
it's more likely that these minions are a family the Monks who follow the Way of the Ascendant
dragon has adopted out of generosity, compassion, Dragon (see chapter 1) might follow a dragon
or manipulation. teacher or could train in monasteries established by
Unlike most other relationships between drag dragons in past generations.
ons and followers, this one is primarily about the
WARLORD
well-being and advancement of the followers, not
The combination of ego and intellect can lead a
the dragon. Dragons are notoriously egotistical even
dragon to become a military leader. Minions help
when they're benevolent, but some make sacrifices
keep the dragon's territory in an iron grip, bringing
the spoils of conquest and the tribute of conquered
CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY 51
=== PAGE 53 ===
peoples to swell the dragon's hoard. Those minions
d20 Adventure Hook
might be Humanoids, violent monsters, or a mix of
13 When the characters defeat a powerful enemy, the
both, forming an alliance under the dragon's rule.
enemy's "pet" dragon tries to adopt the characters.
Depending on the dragon's age and the power
and number of minions involved, a dragon warlord (Parental figure)
might be a local menace or an imperial conqueror. 14 When the characters kill a dragon's minions, the
distraught dragon surrenders and agrees to leave
RELATIONSHIPS AND ADVENTURES the area-while secretly plotting revenge against
d20 Adventure Hook the party. (Parental figure)
The dragon is trying to eliminate a business rival 15 Another group of adventurers-supplied with su
through ruthless competition or underhanded perior equipment and information by their dragon
means, and the rival seeks the characters' help. patron-is pursuing the same goal as the charac
(Business owner) ters. (Patron)
2 A struggling merchant hires the characters to iden 16 Local aristocrats complain that the best artists and
tify a mysterious competitor who seems to have performers are being lured away by a mysterious
unlimited resources. (Business owner) patron's promises of riches. (Patron)
3 A repentant enemy comes to the characters, telling 17 A dragon can teach great magical secrets. But
them that a former companion of the enemy is ac any would-be disciples must prove their worth by
tually a manipulative dragon-and asking them to acquiring a valuable item to add to the dragon's
help get revenge. (Companion) hoard. (Teacher)
4 The characters develop an ever-closer friendship 18 A dragon teacher from a character's past (whom
with a secretive person who seems to have inex the character might not know is a dragon) asks for
haustible wealth and an endless supply of useful help tracking down a student who has turned to
information. (Companion) evil. (Teacher)
5 A city council asks the characters to help put an 19 A marauding group of bandits has grown from an
end to a deadly war between two criminal gangs, irritation to a significant threat after coming under
not knowing one of the gangs is led by a dragon. the leadership of a dragon. (Warlord)
(Crime boss) 20 The warlike minions of two dragons are clashing in
6 While the characters fight a crime family in a major skirmishes across the region, devastating peaceful
city, they discover their patron is a dragon hoping villages and farmlands. (Warlord)
to take over the criminal enterprise. (Crime boss)
DRAGONS' MINIONS
7 A small nation is worried about the aggressive ex
pansion of a dragon-ruled empire on the opposite The magic that suffuses a dragon and the dragon's
side of a desert, ocean, or mountain range. Its lair can sometimes extend to encompass the drag
on's minions as well. To reflect a minion's relation
leaders seek aid from powerful adventurers who
ship to its draconic master, add one or more of these
can protect the nation from conquest. (Emperor)
traits to the minion's stat block.
8 As the characters become powerful enough that
Explosive Minion. When the minion dies, it releases a burst
they might conceivably threaten a dragon ruler,
of energy in a 5-foot-radius sphere. Each creature in that
they are given a choice: enter government service
area takes 1d 8 damage of the same type its master's breath
or face exile in the wild borderlands. (Emperor) weapon deals.
9 Two nobles worry about the amount of money their Minion's Mind. The minion can't be compelled to act in a way
heir is donating to a new temple. (God) contrary to its master's instructions.
10 A dragon with developed dragonsight is trying to Sacrificial Minion. When the minion dies, its master regains
bring together worshipers from multiple worlds to hit points equal to four times the minion's challenge rating, as
long as the master is within 60 feet of it.
perform a ritual that will let the dragon ascend to
true godhood. (God) Selfless Bodyguard. When an attack hits its master and the
minion is within 5 feet of its master, the minion can use its re
11 A dragon noble's servants have kidnapped a well
action to make the attack hit itself instead.
known storyteller or musician because the dragon
Telepathic Minion. The minion and its master can communi
is having trouble sleeping. (Noble)
cate telepathically with each other, as long as they are on the
12 An aristocrat is being blackmailed by someone same plane of existence.
threatening to reveal that the noble is actually a
dragon in disguise. (Noble)
52 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
J
I
=== PAGE 54 ===
DRAGON ENCOUNTERS found in Tales from the Yawning Portal). In this
case, fighting the dragon might be necessary if the
dragon doesn't want to return, but killing the crea
Ofr~n, a dVd5°n who 1(.; m~v~/1 hvng-1 ture is undesirable. Or perhaps the characters are
1(.; p~vu-iv~ a(.; ang-1- Th~ ovtc..om~ fov seriously outmatched by the dragon, and their only
reasonable goal is to escape the encounter alive.
th~ ob(.;~vv,~ c.-v~atvv~ 1(.; th~ (.;am~, bvt Is the encounter in the dragon's lair? Fighting in
a dragon's lair is more likely to mean a fight to
I think- itt impornnt to c.-laviftJ mo-tiv~.
the death, since the dragon will be less keen on
-fiz.ban fleeing an encounter that goes badly and more
determined to hunt down adventurers who flee
after seeing the inside of the dragon's home. This
Whether you're crafting a whole adventure around a
scenario also means an adult or older dragon has
dragon or just want to throw a dragon with an inter
access to lair actions. In contrast, a dragon fight
esting personality into the party's path, how do you
ing outdoors can more easily fly out of reach of op
put a dragon to best use in an encounter? Start by
ponents on the ground. Chapters 4 and 5 feature
answering these four questions:
information and maps to help you build encoun
Is the encounter a goal or an obstacle? Drag- ters in and around a dragon's lair.
ons (particularly adult and older dragons) are Is the dragon alone or accompanied by minions?
well suited to being the climactic encounter With their legendary actions, adult and ancient
in an adventure, and slaying evil dragons is a dragons are designed to be challenging encoun
well-established quest in literature and legend. ters all on their own, but even a younger dragon
But you can also use a dragon as just one of many can be a handful as a solo enemy. On the other
encounters to overcome in an adventure. hand, adding minions to a dragon encounter
What's the goal of the encounter? Not every en can divert the characters' attention away from
counter with a dragon needs to involve combat, let the dragon and make a combat encounter more
alone an all-out fight to the death. Maybe the char interesting-as well as more dangerous. See "Fol-
acters are trying to help a kobold Keeper of Drag
ons retrieve a wyrmling kidnapped by a gang of
goblins (as in "The Sunless Citadel," an adventure
=== PAGE 55 ===
lowers" earlier in this chapter for ideas about how
d20 Complication
the relationship between dragon and minions can
11 Factions and grudges within the ranks of the drag
impact an encounter.
on's minions erupt when the characters challenge
With these four questions in mind, you can look to
the dragon, resulting in infighting that might tip the
the Dragon Encounter Complications table for sug
odds in the main battle in either direction.
gestions of quirks, special effects, and unusual sit
12 A feature in the dragon's lair has an unpredictable
uations that can make any dragon encounter more
magical effect, perhaps similar to a wand of wonder,
interesting and exciting.
a sorcerer's wild magic surge, or a dungeon trick
DRAGON ENCOUNTER COMPLICATIONS as described in the Dungeon Master's Guide. The
dragon avoids the feature unless the encounter
d20 Complication
is going badly, then either activates the feature or
The dragon has no interest in fighting and tries to
tries to goad the characters into doing so.
avoid the characters, until they anger the dragon
13 Spell effects and breath weapons used inside the
through significantly injury or insult.
dragon's lair cause dramatic destruction, including
2 The dragon is too bored to fight and offers the
chasms opening up, ceilings collapsing, pillars top
characters a tiny amount of treasure if they'll leave.
pling, and other effects that can damage or hinder
3 The dragon hates a certain type of character
the characters and the dragon equally.
(sneaky rogues, healers, or heavily armored fight
14 The dragon has a rival who notices the characters
ers, perhaps) and directs at least one attack each
approaching the dragon's lair and keeps tabs on
round at such a character.
the fight. This rival might step in to help the char
4 The dragon tries to drive the characters off by emo
acters or the dragon, depending on the circum
tionally hurting or humiliating them-threatening
stances, or might ambush the characters when
something they obviously care about, damaging
they leave the dragon's lair.
their equipment, insulting them, or showing how
15 The dragon takes tremendous pleasure in adopting
ineffectual their attacks are.
Humanoid form and pretending to be a minion,
5 The dragon has a way to call for help hidden deep
groveling and sniveling when intruders enter the
inside the lair, such as a magic horn that summons
lair and claiming that the dragon is away.
minions, an iron flask with a powerful Fiend inside,
16 The dragon's only goal is to learn a key piece of
or a magic portal to an echo's lair. The characters
information about the characters' larger goals and
must prevent the dragon from summoning aid or
then escape.
face a new threat.
17 The dragon enjoys combat, roaring in appreciation
6 The dragon is desperately trying to protect a partic
each time the characters pull off effective attacks
ular treasure, one or more eggs, or perhaps a min
or flashy spells. But if seriously hurt, the dragon
ion, bargaining to protect this treasure and flying
quickly calls for a truce.
into a rage ifit is harmed.
18 Each round of combat with the dragon, the charac
7 The previous occupant of the dragon's lair left be
ters catch an eerie glimpse of another world where
hind a curse, a trap, or a lingering spirit that clever
one of the dragon's echoes is active.
characters can turn against the dragon.
19 The dragon has a plan to feign death in case of
8 The dragon's lair is almost impossible to navigate
attack-apparently being buried in a cave-in, tum
without access to one or more of the dragon's spe
bling into a deep chasm, drowning in lava, or some
cial movement modes (typically flight, but possibly
similarly dramatic exit. After escaping, the dragon
burrowing, swimming, or climbing).
plots revenge.
9 It's been so long since anyone has dared to intrude
20 At the same time the characters are confronting the
on the dragon's lair that the dragon is more inter
dragon, another group of adventurers is confront
ested in showing off the lair-and impressive lair
ing one of the dragon's echoes on another world.
actions-than in doing serious harm to the charac
Halfway through the fight, either the dragons or the
ters. If the characters escape and spread stories of
characters and the other adventurers switch places.
the dragon's grandeur, so much the better.
10 When the dragon is agitated, the regional effects
that alter the terrain around the lair create visible
changes around the dragon each round.
54 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
' ..........
I
=== PAGE 56 ===
DRAGON ADVENTURES Stop the Attacks. A dragon is causing problems,
and the only solution is to get rid of the dragon.
The dragon might be terrorizing the area near the
Piragn<; ave- not in ~ovv wovld. Yov ave- in lair, perhaps burning farmland and devouring live
stock, demanding tribute from a village, or holding
the-iv<;.
captives for ransom. Alternatively, a dragon might
-fizfan have established a new lair in the remote wilder
ness, driving other monsters out of the region and
straight into inhabited lands. Or a dragon could be
When you want a dragon encounter to be the goal or
a pawn in a greater villain's schemes, perhaps a
focal point of an entire adventure, how do you craft
warlord who has acquired one of the Orbs of Drag
that adventure to highlight the dragon's importance,
onkind. It might be possible to drive the dragon
grandeur, and terrifying power? When you're using
off or somehow change the dragon's behavior, but
the adventure hooks in this book, dragons will fall
sometimes killing the dragon is the only option.
broadly into three roles: monster, schemer, or power.
Reclaim the Dragon's Lair. A dragon has displaced
Think about those categories as you consider the
an entire population to make a lair in the ruins
role you want a dragon to play in your adventure.
of what was once a great city or stronghold. The
people displaced want their home back, so the
DRAGON AS MONSTER
dragon must be removed. Killing the dragon is not
For all their vast power, great intellect, and range necessarily the goal, but it's certainly one way to
of possible motivations, dragons are often simple solve the problem.
creatures at heart. They want food, a secure lair, Acquire the Dragon's Treasure. The dragon's
and treasure. Many tropes of the fantasy genre re hoard contains unimaginable wealth-or perhaps
volve around dealing with a dragon who has become one powerful artifact the characters desperately
too monstrous and putting an end to the danger the
dragon poses to peoples and civilizations.
Three basic goals can provide the framework for a
monstrous dragon adventure:
=== PAGE 57 ===
need to achieve some other goal. Slaying the An adventure featuring a dragon's schemes often
dragon might be one option, but sneaking into the works best as an event-based adventure, as de
lair and stealing what the characters seek is an scribed in the Dungeon Master's Guide. Whether
other. The characters could even bargain with the the dragon is the villain, a patron, or an interested
dragon to acquire the needed item. Alternatively, bystander, flesh out the dragon's personality, goals,
a dragon might seek adventurers to recover items and other traits using the tables and suggestions in
stolen from the dragon's hoard-with a threat that this chapter and chapter 5. The dragon's lair might
local folk will suffer if the characters fail. be a key location for the adventure (perhaps using
a map from chapter 5), but the dragon's schemes
An adventure featuring a dragon in a monster's
could lead the characters anywhere-even to other
role lends itself to a location-based structure. That
worlds and planes of existence.
location is likely the dragon's lair, since it's difficult
to pin a dragon down for an all-out fight in most
DRAGON AS POWER
other sites. You can use one of the lair maps in
In some places, dragons are more than monsters or
chapter 5 of this book as the key location for such
masterminds. They are movers and shakers whose
an adventure, fleshing the site out with features and
desires shape the course of history. A powerful drag
inhabitants using the guidelines in the Dungeon
on's schemes impact the characters because those
Master's Guide.
schemes impact the world as a whole, not because
DRAGON AS SCHEMER the dragon is interested in the characters individu
ally-at least not initially. As the characters become
Most of the adventure hooks in this book involve the
powers in their own right, dragons are more likely
schemes a dragon might put into motion over the
to take personal notice of them.
course of a long life, potentially using followers as
The "Dragon Campaigns" section that follows
agents in the world. In practice, many of a schemer
discusses the world-ranging implications of putting
dragon's goals might be the same as a monstrous
dragons in positions of power and central story
dragon's: acquiring food, securing a lair, and adding
importance in your game. When crafting individual
to a hoard. But other plots might revolve around ac
adventures in the context of such a campaign, take
quiring minions, advancing the cause of a draconic
standard adventure hooks (in this book or else
faction, building the dragon's prestige, working for
where) and dial them up-amplifying the scale and
the well-being of dragonkind as a whole, or altering
significance of a dragon's schemes to make those
the nature of the world and its magic.
plots fit the dragon's stature in the world. Imagine
A dragon's schemes become the basis for an ad
the dragon's hoard on the scale of a national trea
venture when they intersect with the characters'
sury. Think of the dragon's minions as the entire
lives. Most directly, the characters might be asked
nation or religion that owes the dragon allegiance.
to aid the dragon's schemes or to oppose them. The
Adventures at this scale might involve dragons as
Cross Purposes table provides inspiration to help
villains or as patrons, and they might well involve
you turn dragon-related adventure hooks into adven
multiple dragons in conflict with each other. The
tures that impact the characters in your game.
characters might loyally serve one dragon in oppo
sition to another, or they might attempt to play mul
CROSS-PURPOSES
tiple dragons against one another-perhaps earning
d6 The Dragon's Schemes ...
the ire of them all .
... directly target one or more characters. The ad
venture begins when the dragon or the dragon's
minions confront the characters.
2 ... threaten a character's bond or an NPC who's im
portant to one or more characters.
3 ... challenge a character's ideal or exploit a flaw.
The character might hear rumors of the dragon's
activity, spurring them into action.
4 ... trap the characters between clashing forces.
5 ... create an opportunity for a character to pursue a
personal goal.
6 ... cause an accident or catastrophe that threatens
the characters.
56 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
=== PAGE 58 ===

=== PAGE 59 ===
DRAGON CAMPAIGNS If you want to build a campaign that puts dragons
in a similarly prominent role, consider any of the fol
Dragons occupy a prominent place in most D&D
lowing options.
worlds, but in some realms, they are central to a
world's story. Consider these three examples. CAMPAIGN EVENTS
Krynn. The home of the Dragonlance setting is the The Dungeon Master's Guide includes a discussion
battleground for an unending conflict between of world-shaking events that might define turning
Bahamut and Tiamat. Tiamat commands armies points at the start, middle, or end of a campaign.
of draconians (described in chapter 6) formed One way to give dragons a prominent role in your
from the corrupted eggs of metallic dragons, while campaign is to apply a draconic twist to any of
heroes and villains alike ride mighty dragons these events.
into battle.
Rise or Fall of a Leader or an Era. A powerful
Council of Wyrms. The Io's Blood isles are a vast
dragon establishing a new lair in a region can be
domain governed by an assembly of ancient
a singularly impactful event. Likewise, the death
wyrms representing eighty-eight clans of chro
of an ancient dragon can cause dramatic changes
matic, metallic, and gem dragons. The council's
in the world. The balance of power shifts. Estab
subjects include dozens of Humanoid peoples,
lished territories are suddenly contested or might
some of whom serve as closely bonded aides to
be undefended against other perils. The dragon's
dragon masters.
hoard represents tremendous wealth flowing
Tarkir. In the multiverse of the MAGIC: THE
through a single region. Entire populations of Hu
GATHERING trading card game, five dragonlords
manoids or monsters might move in or out of the
rule supreme over the world of Tarkir. After cen
dragon's territory.
turies of battle between Humanoid clans and the
Cataclysmic Disaster. A dragon rampaging through
~
ancient dragonlords and their broods, the dragons
inhabited lands can be worse than any natural di
triumphed and claimed dominion over the clans,
saster. What has stirred the dragon's wrath? Will
which now bear the dragons' names.
58 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
l
I .......
=== PAGE 60 ===
these rampages continue? What might appease
the creature?
Assault or Invasion. A dragon might attack a
stronghold of civilization, or an army marching
under Tiamat's banner with dragon riders
wheeling overhead could begin the conquest
of a neighboring realm. Or a dragon's minions
might launch an attack in preparation for the
dragon establishing a new lair.
Rebellion, Revolution, Overthrow. A dragon
who is a political or religious leader might
face a rebellion. Another dragon might even
rise up to lead the freedom fighters.
Extinction or Depletion. If dragons are on the
verge of extinction, the last survivors might be
come extremely important to your campaign. Al
ternatively, people might have long believed drag
ons to be extinct, only to be shocked when one or
more of these mythical creatures emerge from
hiding or a long hibernation. What drove them
away, and what is bringing them back? Another
possibility is that dragons are responsible for the
near-extinction of some other kind of creature or
the depletion of a resource. What if gold or magic
items are scarce because dragons have collected
almost all such wealth in their hoards?
New Organization. The new organization might be
one of the dragon organizations described earlier
faction. By joining one dragon's faction, characters
in this chapter or a dragon faction similar to those
might end up locked in bitter strife with a different
discussed in the next section. Alternatively, any
faction-and characters who join different dragon
apparently ordinary organization might have a
factions might have to carefully balance the needs of
dragon at its head-a shape-shifter dragon leading
those factions against the goals of their party.
a thieves' guild, perhaps, or a devout dragon stir
The different ways dragons can be categorized
ring up zealots in Bahamut's name.
suggest numerous approaches to organizing dragon
Discovery, Expansion, Invention. The discovery
factions in your world.
in question might involve dragons directly. People
might have only just learned that dragons exist, THE METALLIC ORDERS
discovered the enormous wealth stored in their Perhaps the chromatic dragons in your world are
hoards, or learned of a magical reaction that can a force of chaos, with five factions of metallic drag
be sparked by the use of dragon blood or scales. ons shouldering the responsibility for organizing
Alternatively, dragons might be among the crea Humanoid forces to battle their chromatic kin.
tures competing to possess or control a new These factions are devoted to common goals-con
discovery. straining the rampages of the chromatic dragons
Prediction, Omen, Prophecy. A prophecy might and limiting Tiamat's influence in the world-but
deal with any of the other kinds of events de they have different methods, adhere to different
scribed here, with dragons as its focus. Alterna ideals, and attract different kinds of members. The
tively, the prophecy might be uttered by a dragon Silver Order might be a chivalric order that attracts
or read and interpreted primarily by dragons (like paladins and fighters, holds its members to the high
the Draconic Prophecy in the world of Eberron). est standards of behavior, and wields cold magic.
The Brass Order could be a loose affiliation of good
DRAGON FACTIONS
hearted scoundrels, including rogues and bards,
Draconic factions and the conflicts between them who favor fire magic and trickery.
can provide a useful framework to organize your en An adventuring party might include members
tire campaign around. Characters might swear their of any or all of the five Metallic Orders, each con
allegiance to a dragon or trade their services to cerned with advancing the cause of their own order
dragons in exchange for membership in a draconic while cooperating in pursuit of common goals.
CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY 59
=== PAGE 61 ===
THE SCALED CIRCLES the scale, the fang, the claw, the wing, and the eye,
Alternatively, each family of dragons-chromatic, representing endurance, ruthlessness, savagery,
metallic, and gem-could be represented by a sin speed, and cunning, respectively. You could also cre
gle faction. Each draconic faction has a particular ate factions based around the damage types dealt by
set of goals that doesn't necessarily put it in direct different dragons' breath weapons, so a fire-based
conflict with the other two factions, but that doesn't faction would include red, gold, and brass dragons,
always inspire cooperation. For example, the Chro while green dragons would have a poison-based fac
matic Circle might focus on self-aggrandizement, as tion all to themselves. The gem dragons would also
each member of the faction tries to amass as much be unique in this system.
wealth and power as possible. The Gem Circle, by Alternatively, you could build draconic factions
contrast, might be dedicated to the pursuit of knowl around ideals and goals that aren't specifically dra
edge, while the Metallic Circle is more altruistic, conic, perhaps applying a dragon overlay to the ten
working to further the advancement of entire societ guilds of Ravnica or Humanoid factions active in
ies and civilizations. Faen1n-such the Harpers, the Order of the Gaunt
Some groups of characters might all affiliate with let, the Emerald Enclave, the Lords' Alliance, and
a single circle, while others might include members the Zhentarim, all of which have appeared in a num
of different circles. Different affiliations don't neces ber of D&D adventures.
sarily create conflict within a party, though. Rather,
DRAGON GODS
those affiliations create a potentially interesting ten
sion between individual goals and the goals of the Moving from the realm of temporal power to the
party as a whole. spiritual domain, dragons can also fill the role of
gods in a campaign world, elevated to a central role
DRAGON O VERLORDS in the beliefs and myths of your setting. The two
Your world might have numerous dragon over
most important gods in the Dragonlance setting
lords-one for each kind of metallic, chromatic,
Paladine and Takhisis-are identified with Bahamut
and gem dragon, and possibly for deep dragons,
and Tiamat, though they are not always worshiped
dragon turtles, faerie dragons, moonstone dragons,
in dragon form. Similarly, the gods of the Sovereign
and shadow dragons. These overlords are the old
Host and the Dark Six in Eberron are sometimes
est and most powerful of their kinds, and all other
described as dragons and might be dragons who as
dragons of the same kind owe allegiance to them.
cended to godhood.
In addition, Humanoids who know what's good for If the gods are distant from their mortal worship
them give their allegiance to a dragon overlord in ex ers in your campaign, making those gods dragons
change for the dragon's protection. The result might
is largely an aesthetic choice that reinforces the
be a feudal society, where dragons fill the highest
importance of dragons. Perhaps the high priests
ranks of the aristocracy.
of the gods are also dragons, or they could be dra
In such a setting, characters need to decide how
conians (described in chapter 6), dragonborn, or
they fit into this system of fealty. Some characters
half-dragons. Anyone with draconic ancestry or
might swear allegiance to a dragon overlord and
magic might be viewed as carrying a divine blessing
end up as important agents enforcing that dragon's
in such a setting, and actual dragons would be re
will in the world-perhaps even to the point of join
garded with reverential awe.
ing a war against a different overlord. Or they could
On the other hand, the dragon gods of your cam
remain independent, traveling from one dragon's paign might be ever present in the world and fully
domain to another and dealing with the complex
involved in the lives of their worshipers. You could
and sometimes violent political conflicts among reimagine the gods of Theros (detailed in Mythic
overlords. If different characters owe allegiance to Odysseys ofTheros) as dragons, so shining Heliod
different dragons, they might cooperate smoothly
becomes a gold dragon, Erebos becomes a black
for a while but then find themselves in conflict when dracolich, Thassa is a dragon turtle, and so on.
tensions erupt between the overlords. Such char These dragon gods might grant supernatural gifts to
acters might then be put in the position of trying to
their followers in exchange for devotion, potentially
make peace between the dragons-before they're
even transforming their favored ones into dragon
commanded to go to war against each other! born. You could draw on the supernatural gifts de
scribed in chapter 2 as well as the piety benefits de
OTHER ORGANIZING PRINCIPLES
tailed in Mythic Odysseys of Theros for inspiration.
Dragon factions can be based on many other as
pects of dragon identity in addition to those above.
The five dragon-ruled clans of Tarkir, for example,
each identify with one aspect of draconic nature-
60 CHAPTER 3 I DRAGONS IN PLAY
........ ,--,j
I
=== PAGE 62 ===
DRAGONS OF MYTH Dungeons of Dragons. In the earliest days of cre
Even if you don't elevate dragons to the status of ation, fifteen dragons burrowed deep into the
gods in your campaign, these creatures might earth and went to sleep. Over the eons, elaborate
still have a mythic role to play in the world, grant underground dungeons have formed above and
ing them a supernatural significance. Consider around them, becoming habitats for a wide variety
these examples: of different monsters and repositories for vast trea
sures. Adventurers on this world are defined by
Artifact of Law. When an artifact called the Rod
their willingness to brave at least the upper levels
ofL aw was shattered into seven parts during the
of these dungeons, but no one has ever penetrated
Battle of Pesh, seven ancient metallic dragons
all the way to the depths where the sleeping drag
were assigned to be the guardians of its frag
ons still lie.
ments. Even sundered, this mighty artifact was
Pillars of Creation. Five ancient metallic dragons
so powerful that great cities sprang up near the
(one of each kind) make their lairs in the Pillars of
dragon lairs that house the fragments, forming the
Creation. If all these dragons are killed, the world
centers of civilization. The dragons are patrons
will literally collapse into chaos.
of the seven cities, and their roles as guardians of
Stirrings of Rebirth. When the greatest spiritual
the artifact are all but forgotten.
leaders of the world reach the end of their lives,
Cult of a Dead God. At the dawn of creation, the
each is laid to rest on a funeral pyre and reborn
gods of this world slew another divine being-per
out of the ashes as a dragon egg. Temples and
haps their tyrannical parent or one of their kin
monasteries across the world house collections
who betrayed them. They cut this being's body
of eggs representing all their past leaders, though
into five pieces, each of which was fed to a differ
most people doubt they will ever hatch. So what
ent chromatic dragon who gained immortality as a
happens when cracks begin to appear in the
result. Now a cult is plotting to kill these five drag
oldest eggs?
ons, cut them open to retrieve the pieces of the
