as the dragon plays with it constantly
Yov Mi9't think. a ire-d diragnt fire- wovld
4 A mobile from which hang six figurines of pixies and
sprites; the dragon insists that Fey allies address bvirn awa~ an~ hwe-niv iMpiropiridie-<; and
any questions and concerns to the figurines
le.ave- the- diragnt bire-ath <;Me.Iii~ fy-e,<;h
5 A painting of a beautiful Feywild vista; the dragon
studies the painting every day for clues about the a<; <;piri~ Fowe-ir<;. Bvt ~ov'cJ be- wiro~
vista's whereabouts -rizban
6 An ornate silver chest that holds a mountain of gold
coins; the dragon refuses to open the chest, claim
Use the tables, map, and other information in this
ing it can still smell the stink of the "noxious metal"
section to craft unique encounters with red dragons.
7 A collection of gem-encrusted pitchers, decanters,
and goblets; the dragon will not consume faerie CREATING A RED DRAGON
nectar unless it is served in one of these items Use the Red Dragon Personality Traits and Red
8 A vast bookshelf full of dream journals written by Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your portrayal of
creatures the dragon has befriended over the years; distinctive red dragon characters, and use the Red
the dragon has each entry illustrated by a different Dragon Spellcasting table to help select spells for a
spellcasting dragon.
celebrated artist, making the library one of the larg
est art collections in the world
•
=== PAGE 135 ===
RED DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS RED DRAGON ADVENTURES
d8 Trait The Red Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
The thrill of the hunt and of battle makes my blood suggestions for stories and adventures involving
burn and stokes the fire in my heart. A pity there are red dragons.
so few foes and so little prey worthy of me.
RED DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
2 The worship of smaller creatures pleases me,
d8 Adventure Hook
though their weakness is pathetic-how can they
do other than adore me? A red dragon has spent years hunting a stolen trea
sure, which has fallen into the hands of adventurers
3 Nothing is better than to sleep and dream upon my
who have no idea where it came from.
hoard with the warmth of a full belly. Let those who
would disturb me beware! 2 A red dragon's fiery breath is the only means of
completing an important magic item or of destroy
4 Ah, if these foolish creatures only knew they were
ing a baleful artifact.
but pawns in the games I play to amuse myself.
3 A red dragon is the cause of raging wildfires, mak
5 I know that others seek to steal my treasures, my
ing the hunt for the dragon even more dangerous.
beautiful baubles, won through strength and cun
ning. But they are mine. Mine! 4 A red dragon is unusually willing to entertain a
peace envoy representing the various peoples dwell
6 All that I survey, I could easily destroy. From time
ing in the valley below the dragon's mountain lair.
to time, it is important to remind these small crea
tures of the true extent of my power. 5 A dwarf wants to recover a family heirloom rumored
to be in the hoard of a red dragon.
7 Although my power and life span are vast, they have
merely whetted my appetite for immortality. 6 Evil cultists plan to meet with a red dragon and per
suade it to become a dracolich.
8 Heroes need foes to test them. Not all teachers can
afford to be kind, and some lessons must be harsh. 7 A red dragon has been held in an enchanted slum
ber for generations, but signs suggest the enchant
RED DRAGON IDEALS ment is beginning to fail.
d6 Ideal 8 A region has survived for generations by annually
Cruelty. Pain and fear are the most powerful tools. tithing victims and treasures to a red dragon.
With them, any creature's will can be broken. (Evil)
CONNECTED CREATURES
2 Might. Only the strongest survive and prosper, so I
Red dragons treat other creatures as potential ser
must be the strongest of all. (Any) vants or pawns, valuable only as long as they fulfill
3 Greed. If I desire a thing, then it must be mine and the dragon's needs. Many red dragons terrorize
mine alone. (Evil) creatures into serving them-and sometimes into
worshiping them as well. Others build up shadowy
4 Respect. All that I have achieved must be acknowl
networks of manipulation and control, so many of
edged and treated with the utmost respect. (Any)
their servants have no idea who the true ruler is.
5 No Limits. I do whatever I please, whenever it
pleases me to do so. (Chaotic)
RED DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS
6 Responsibility. Fire destroys, but it can also temper
d6 Connected Creatures
when it is applied carefully-if the material tested is
A fire giant lord has captured a red dragon wyrmling
strong enough. (Lawful)
and is looking to train the willful creature as a pet.
2 A red dragon wyrmling adopted a nest of fire
RED DRAGON SPELLCASTING
snakes, which have now grown into salamanders
Spell
who protect the wyrmling.
Age Save DC Spells Known
3 A band of kobolds was driven out of its warren by a
Young 16 bane, heat metal, hypnotic pattern,
red dragon wyrmling; they now raid to survive-and
suggestion
to gather offerings to propitiate "the winged god."
Adult 19 bane, dominate person, heat metal,
hypnotic pattern, suggestion 4 A tiefling child has secretly hidden and raised a
red dragon wyrmling from an egg. The wyrmling is
r'l• Ancient 21 bane, dominate person, heat metal,
bonded to the child, but dangerous to anyone else.
. hypnotic pattern, power word stun,
., suggestion
134 CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 136 ===
ANCIENT RED DRAGON CONNECTIONS
d6 Connected Creatures
5 A bound fire elemental serves as the guardian of an d4 Connected Creatures
orphaned red dragon wyrmling. An ancient red dragon controls a vast intelligence
network that has infiltrated nearly every nation.
6 A band of hobgoblins is thrown into chaos when a
red dragon wyrmling supports a coup by an ambi 2 An ancient red dragon warlord has united a number
tious war leader, in exchange for tribute. of formerly squabbling nations, creating a massive
army ready to conquer the known world.
YOUNG RED DRAGON CONNECTIONS 3 A cult in service to an ancient red dragon is gather
d6 Connected Creatures ing resources to summon a consort ofTiamat, so
A specter is bound as the guardian of a young red the cult's master can defeat the consort in single
dragon's treasure hoard. combat and claim a place at Tiamat's side.
2 A young red dragon's new lair spawns magma me 4 A balor demon hopes an ancient red dragon's drag
phits and smoke mephits, which escape into the onsight can help the demon coordinate a multidi
surrounding countryside and cause mischief. mensional play for power in the Abyss.
3 A young red dragon serves as the guardian of a
RED DRAGON LAIRS
githyanki creche, hoping to eventually earn the alle
Red dragons lair in mountain badlands and high,
giance of the young githyanki raised there.
isolated peaks and hills, preferring warm caverns
4 Ogres and ettins cowed by a young red dragon wan
in the rocky depths beneath those landscapes. Lairs
der the foothills near the dragon's lair, helping to
with natural geothermal or lava vents are highly
drive away intruders.
sought after, as these features create an environ
5 A colony of mind flayers has captured and con ment ideally suited to the dragons' taste.
trolled a young red dragon, which now guards the Minions often attend red dragons in their lairs.
passages to the illithids' underground lair. These servants keep the place swept clean of refuse
and watch out for intruders, while providing the im
6 A parent of a young red dragon has become a dra
perious dragon with subjects to bully and command.
colich, and the dragon wishes to see the Undead
Some minions worship the dragon and serve will
abomination destroyed.
ingly, but others would escape if they could.
ADULT RED DRAGON CONNECTIONS RED DRAGON LAIR FEATURES
d8 Connected Creatures The red dragon lair shown in map 5.11 is inside the
A flock of gargoyles dwell near an adult red dragon's caldera of an active volcano. Azers dug out and ex
panded the lava tunnels within the volcano's peak,
lair, serving as lookouts and guardians.
just above the level of the caldera's lava pools. Al
2 Azer artisans are bound in service to an adult red
though the azers are long since gone, their construc
dragon, for whom they make sculptures and art ob
tion-and much of their lost wealth-now serves the
jects from precious metals and gems.
dragon's needs. That construction also provides a
3 An adult red dragon rules over a hidden valley filled network of tunnels too small for the dragon to use,
with dinosaurs. but where other creatures can make their lairs.
4 A shadow demon serves as an adult red dragon's The lair has the following features:
spy and messenger. Caldera. The steep sides of the caldera drop away
5 Cultists worshiping an adult red dragon act as the from the edge of the cone, making a 60-foot de
dragon's agents throughout the region. scent to the lava below. The rough rock of the
caldera is not overly difficult to climb, but the area
6 A mysterious masked knight relentlessly hunting an
grows increasingly hot as creatures descend.
adult red dragon is, in fact, the dragon's half-dragon
Pillared Hall. The dragon sleeps in the large hall
offspring bent on vengeance.
on the left edge of the map, where a row of crum
7 An adult red dragon owes a debt of service to an
bling pillars supports the ceiling and a narrow
elderly druid, enforced by a magical oath. channel of lava keeps the hall hot.
8 An adult red dragon has seized an outpost of an Hoard. A side tunnel off the pillared hall descends
efreeti pasha's domain as a lair, and the noble genie 30 feet down a steep lava tube to a ledge above a
wants to evict the intruder. pool of magma. Here the dragon has piled a hoard
that gleams in the dull red light.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 135
=== PAGE 137 ===
RED DRAGON LAIR
MAP 5-11
,,,
~~-~~~~w,
-
rt
.. -~»re, 1 square = 10 ee
~--
i
~-;W~
i~~~
,-..,,,/!" - -
-
~a~
~_;l~
~~:t9 ~:r~-
~(!&
~~~®
.·
~1~~
C-,~
~ -~-Bl~ ~@~m-~t
• - ~ ~I
·=_
ITh~~~
~ '--U~"\l
... ....,,,...,_,,
CHAPTER 5 I DRAGON OMICON
=== PAGE 138 ===
ADDITIONAL LAIR ACTIONS For a red dragon, every treasure is a mark of
At your discretion, a legendary (adult or ancient) red pride and a personal trophy. Like a proud hunter,
dragon can use one or both of the following addi a red dragon relishes telling the tale of acquiring
tional lair actions while in its lair: each individual relic or coin, glorifying the dragon's
own deeds.
Noxious Smoke. A cloud of thick, dark smoke fills
a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on a point the
RED DRAGON ART OBJECTS
dragon can see within 120 feet of it. The sphere
d12 Object
spreads around corners, and its area is heavily
obscured. A creature other than the dragon that A hammered metal brazier elaborately etched and
starts its turn in the cloud or enters it for the first set with polished obsidian, which sits atop a stand
time on its turn must succeed on a DC 15 Consti holding rare incense blends
tution saving throw or be poisoned until the end of 2 A beautifully inlaid mosaic map of the region within
its turn. The cloud lasts until initiative count 20 on
a 100-mile radius of the dragon's lair
the next round.
3 A life-sized basalt statue of a fierce knight, weapon
Searing Heat. Searing heat spreads out in a
raised to strike, which might be the preserved form
15-foot-radius sphere centered on a point the
of an actual knight turned to stone
dragon can see within 120 feet of it. Any creature
that enters the affected area or starts its turn 4 The blackened skull of a young dragon that has
there must make a DC 15 Constitution saving been etched with designs and decorated with gems
throw, taking 10 (3d6) fire damage on a failed 5 A tiered fountain filled with liquid gold that is cool
save, or half as much damage on a successful
to the touch, but immediately hardens if removed
one. The heat lasts until initiative count 20 on the
from the fountain
next round.
6 A statue of the red dragon with gemstones for eyes
REGIONAL EFFECTS 7 A detailed, life-sized elf skull cast in precious metal
Any of these effects might appear in the area around 8 A game board and a complete set of pieces, all
a red dragon's lair, in addition to or instead of the
carved and inlaid with precious and semiprecious
effects described in the Monster Manual:
stones (the dragon is fond of playing the game but
Desertification. Precipitation is almost nonexistent has few worthy opponents)
within 6 miles of the dragon's lair, making the 9 A fist-sized gemstone carved into a likeness of the
land parched and arid and most plant life withered
dragon's head
and brown.
10 A set of precious metal tablets containing ancient
Fiery Senses. The dragon can hear up to 30 feet
lore
through any open flame within 1 mile of the
dragon's lair. 11 A beautifully wrought crown set with fiery gem
Ominous Flames. Open flames within 6 miles of stones, possibly the legacy of a lost empire
the dragon's lair are tinged dark red, hiss and 12 A beautiful polished sphere of rainbow obsidian, set
crackle constantly, and throw off embers and on a wrought-gold stand
showers of sparks.
ASHARDAL0N
RED DRAGON TREASURES
The terrible red dragon Ashardalon is spoken of in
Red dragons love gold above all other precious legends across the multiverse for his terrible ram
metals and are entranced by its gleam, its luster, pages, which turned lush grasslands into ashen plains
and the sound of its chime. They amass gold coins and caused mighty citadels to be swallowed up in the
earth. As he awakened his dragonsight, he recruited
and objects to form the bulk of their hoards, along
a balor demon named Ammet, the Eater of Souls,
with red and fiery gemstones such as rubies and
to help him drain the power of his echoes on other
fire opals. Red dragons favor items made of metal
worlds. When he was struck a mortal blow to the
and stone, which can survive the test of time. Many heart, he replaced the injured organ with the balor.
such items in an ancient red dragon's hoard might This transplant has lent a fiendish cast to his features,
be hundreds or thousands of years old. They tend to and his eyes glow with demonic flame. A secretive cult
eschew treasures that burn, such as leather, paper, of Ashardalon's followers and spawn serves him on
the Material Plane, furthering the dragon's schemes to
and cloth items.
attain godhood.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 137
=== PAGE 139 ===
SAPPHIRE DRAGONS
d6 Ideal
3 Knowledge. The stories surrounding every piece
in my collection are as important as the treasures
• A <;apphive- dva5°n~ Fi&it onu- in<;pive-d a themselves. (Any)
wvrli~ danu- in a u-rnin ki~om that 4 Order. An organized hoard makes me happy-and
you don't want to see me unhappy. {Lawful)
)
<;hall ve-main name-le,<;<;. ~bavva<;<;i~1, it
5 Preparation. Justice and righteousness do not guar
i<; <;till pe-vfonv1e-d to thi<; da1. antee victory. Planning and tactics do. {Lawful)
-Przban 6 Companionship. Sure, my hoard brings me great
joy. But the real treasures are the guests who stop
......... by to see it. {Good)
Use the tables, map, and other information in this
section to craft unique encounters with sapphire
SAPPHIRE DRAGON ADVENTURES
dragons. Sapphire dragon stat blocks appear in
chapter 6. The Sapphire Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
suggestions for stories and adventures involving
CREATING A SAPPHIRE DRAGON sapphire dragons.
Use the Sapphire Dragon Personality Traits and
SAPPHIRE DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
Sapphire Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your por
trayal of distinctive sapphire dragon characters. d8 Adventure Hook
Posing as an avatar of an evil earth elemental-god,
SAPPHIRE DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS a sapphire dragon serves as general to a fanatical
d8 Trait cult-and claims the spoils of the cult's victories.
I often fixate on specific historical battles or wars 2 A sapphire dragon is bound by an ancient pact to
and won't rest until my hoard contains that con- advise a monarchy on matters of defense-until
flict's most significant artifacts. someone bests the dragon's security measures.
2 I am constantly aware of a call from beyond this 3 A sapphire dragon seeks adventurers to lead into
world. I must prepare to answer that call by amass- battle against the mind flayers that usurped the
ing powerful arms and armor. dragon's lair.
3 I secretly look forward to adventurers trying to infil- 4 Powerful infernal creatures have opened a portal in
trate my lair. How else could I try out new defenses? the middle of a city square. The key to closing the
4 Give me a storied helmet or scimitar over a pile of portal is a mythical holy weapon that happens to be
gold any day. the pride and joy of a sapphire dragon's hoard.
5 No creature can outsmart my defenses-if they do, 5 A sapphire dragon threatens to sink a town into the
they obviously cheated. Underdark unless the authorities find and turn over
6 Any creature that can hold their own against me a thief who stole from the dragon.
must teach me how-whether they want to or not. 6 A village is beset by swarms of giant spiders drawn
7 I cannot resist a game of dragonchess-which, I to the area when a sapphire dragon took up res
will have you know, my ancestors probably invented. idence nearby. Ridding the village of the spiders
means tampering with the dragon's food supply.
8 The sight of blood makes me queasy.
7 A sapphire dragon invites warriors to vie for the
SAPPHIRE DRAGON IDEALS honor of studying military tactics under the dragon.
The front-runner is an infamous bandit leader who
d6 Ideal
will undoubtedly terrorize the area if they win.
Solitude. A stranger is just an intruder I haven't
dealt with yet. {Neutral) 8 A sapphire dragon's lair is so well protected that its
inner defenses have never been tested. The dragon
2 Preservation. Most creatures cannot be trusted to
spreads rumors of the treasures within to attract
properly safeguard historically significant artifacts.
adventurers who can put the traps to the test.
I can. (Lawful)
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
...
=== PAGE 140 ===
CONNECTED CREATURES ADULT SAPPHIRE DRAGON CONNECTIONS
Sapphire dragons are generally solitary creatures.
d8 Connected Creatures
On the rare occasion that one forms nonhostile re
An adult sapphire dragon lives adjacent to active
lationships with other beings, it is almost always to
purple worm tunnels, hoping the threat of the worm
bolster the defenses of the dragon's lair and hoard.
will deter treasure hunters.
SAPPHIRE DRAGON WYRMLING CONNECTIONS 2 An adult sapphire dragon employs a dao to help
shape and defend the dragon's lair, and the dao
d6 Connected Creatures
maintains a portal to the Elemental Plane of Earth
After being robbed by gnomes who had pledged
there.
to protect the hoard, a sapphire dragon wyrmling
3 An adult sapphire dragon regularly confers with a
installs new guardians that have no interest in ma
plane-hopping archmage regarding the dragon's on
terial riches: gelatinous cubes and ochre jellies.
going dreams of other worlds and other lives.
2 A band of minotaurs in service to Baphomet has
4 A drow priestess of Lolth and several yochlol de
captured a sapphire dragon wyrmling to learn from
mons have been ordered by their goddess to deal
the wyrmling's strategies.
with the adult sapphire dragon who has been hunt
3 Two sapphire dragon wyrmlings vie for the same
ing her holy spiders.
territory. Their primary battle tactic involves luring
5 A forgetful and nearsighted adult sapphire dragon
grells into each other's lairs.
believes a blue dragon wyrmling is actually the sap
4 A group of Lolth-worshiping drow warriors were
phire wyrmling who left home months before.
sent to kill a sapphire dragon wyrmling who has
6 An adult sapphire dragon and a squadron of
been making meals of their goddess's holy spiders.
githyanki have joined forces to locate and destroy a
5 A sapphire dragon wyrmling is on the verge of star
mind flayer colony.
vation after incorrectly identifying a nearby phase
7 A group of stone giants believes a young sapphire
spider nest as an easy food source.
dragon to be an emissary of their god, Skoraeus
6 A sapphire dragon wyrmling's hoard contains a
Stonebones. The dragon considers the notion ridic
cursed item, which has attracted specters and
ulous but loves having an audience who will listen
wraiths to the area around the dragon's lair.
to lectures on military history without complaint.
YOUNG SAPPHIRE DRAGON CONNECTIONS 8 An adult sapphire dragon and an aboleth psychi
cally face off for control of an area of the Underdark.
d6 Connected Creatures
The constant bombardment of psychic forces has
A young sapphire dragon practices martial skills by
begun to affect the local fauna in strange ways.
regularly using a horn ofV alhalla to summon ber
serker spirits to fight.
ANCIENT SAPPHIRE DRAGON CONNECTIONS
2 A young sapphire dragon has found a collection of
d4 Connected Creatures
long-forgotten clay golems and is trying to teach
An ancient sapphire dragon has called a conclave
them military tactics.
of ancient gem dragons to discuss how they might
3 A druid summoned galeb duhr to guard a young
reunite and restore Sardior, the Ruby Dragon.
sapphire dragon's hoard in exchange for the dragon
2 A horde of revenants led by a death knight has one
controlling the giant spider population, but the ga
goal-destroying the ancient sapphire dragon who
leb duhr are causing trouble for local miners.
defeated their army in battle centuries ago.
4 Two Lolth cultists seek a magical relic that attracts
3 An ancient sapphire dragon guards the phylactery
giant spiders, but the relic's resting place has be
of a lich who helped the dragon establish a lair cen
come a young sapphire dragon's feeding ground.
turies before becoming Undead.
5 A young sapphire dragon and a hobgoblin warlord
4 Lolth the Spider Queen has declared war on an an
have become friends. The hobgoblin visits regularly
cient sapphire dragon who has annexed the heart of
to trade war stories and tactics with the dragon.
her cult's Underdark territory.
6 A kuo-toa archpriest believes a young sapphire
dragon is a god named Sliploopdreegoo, and calls
on other kuo-toa to worship the dragon.
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 139
=== PAGE 141 ===
SAPPHIRE DRAGON LAIRS Hoard Caverns. The bulk of the lair, filling most of
the lower half of the map, comprises chambers
Sapphire dragons make their lairs in enormous
the dragon uses to host guests and visitors. These
caverns and complex tunnel systems. As they grow
caverns hold the bulk of the dragon's hoard, par
older, they continually renovate their lairs, using
ticularly art objects that are impressive but not
their tunneling abilities and command over stone.
irreplaceable.
Sapphire dragons eventually create dizzying hon
Sleeping Chamber. At the heart of the lair, pro
eycombs of hidden passages, deceptively thin walls,
tected behind more thin crystal walls, the largest
and secret chambers that allow them to traverse the
cavern serves as the dragon's sleeping chamber.
entire lair without ever being seen by intruders. The
A raised section studded with sapphire crystals
best-defended sapphire dragon lairs have no easily
offers a vantage from which the dragon can keep
accessible entrances or exits at all, and trespassers
an eye on the chamber's access points. The drag
who do find their way inside must then contend with
on's most valuable treasures are stored here and
a maze of corridors, dead ends, and steep inclines.
in adjoining caves, and the walls of this central
chamber are covered in art depicting various bat
SAPPHIRE DRAGON LAIR FEATURES
tles-many of which the dragon took part in.
The sapphire dragon lair shown in map 5.12 is a se
ries of natural tunnels and chambers the dragon has
SAPPHIRE DRAGON TREASURES
adapted to serve as a lair. The lair has few natural
entrances, so whole sections are inaccessible with Sapphire dragons covet items of martial signifi
out excavation or magic, as the dragon can simply cance above other treasure. Weapons and armor
open doorways in walls whenever necessary. from epic conflicts are usually the centerpieces of a
The lair has the following features: sapphire dragon's hoard, set alongside military his
tories, treatises on warfare, and battle mementos, as
Disguised Entrances. An otherwise unremarkable
well as trophies from the dragon's own conquests of
cave (shown at the top of the map) provides the
subterranean foes such as illithids and aboleths.
main access to the lair by way of two sections of
Sapphire dragons meticulously catalogue their
relatively thin crystal walls. The dragon can use
hoards. Each dragon has a unique organizational
a lair action to open or close passages through
system; some are straightforward, but some only the
these walls throughout the lair.
dragon can fully comprehend (weapons categorized
Cobweb-Choked Tunnels. Adventurers who man
by which armies they were used against, armor
age to access the other side of the cave's crystal
ordered by the ancestry of its last wearer, and so
walls discover a network of dark, cobweb-choked
forth). Regardless of the system, a sapphire dragon
tunnels extending deep into the earth, set with
takes pride in knowing exactly where any given item
natural steps and shelves throughout. The dragon
is and can recite a detailed history of that item while
spends little time in this part of the lair, visiting
guiding curious guests to (or away from) it.
only when the spiders there need tending-or
when the dragon needs a snack.
SAPPHIRE DRAGON ART OBJECTS
Underground River. A river flows along the
d6 Object
right and bottom edges of the map, providing
the dragon with fresh water and an alternative A battle standard showing the coat of arms of an
entrance. Originating on the surface, the river ancient realm the dragon failed to protect
descends through narrow tunnels that eventually 2 A dragonchess set with the white knights replaced
lead to the Underdark. by the symbols of a war god; the board is set up for
the start of a new game, and the dragon has been
BLEUCORUNDUM waiting decades for the god to make the first move
Bleucorundum is an ancient sapphire dragon with
3 A large tapestry depicting a bloody battle between
an equally ancient hatred of beholders and their kin.
After losing both parents to beholder attacks, he fled two realms of the surface world; the dragon claims
to the Lake of Steam in southern Faerun. There, he it is the tiny dragon embroidered in one corner
discovered the resting place of a martial order known
4 A music box that plays a haunting song; the dragon
as the Knights of the Crescent Moon, who had fought
claims the music is very popular on another world
beholders in an ancient war. Bleucorundum found the
knights held in stasis, awaiting the day they would be 5 A necklace made from discarded sapphire dragon
called upon to fight their ancient enemies again, and horn tips and tail barbs; the dragon refuses to say
he vowed to guard them until they awaken. He styles
whether the pieces were donated willingly
himself the Sapphire Sentinel, self-appointed guardian
of the Sleeping Legion. But his vigil is lonely, and his 6 A perfectly polished mirror that the dragon spends
servitor gargoyles provide little companionship. hours staring into, hoping to catch glimpses into
other worlds
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON
=== PAGE 142 ===
•
•
•
SAPPHIRE DRAGON LAIR
1 square = 10 feet
CHAPTER 5 I DRACONOMICON 141
=== PAGE 143 ===
d6 Ideal
3 Cruelty. The only release for my pain is to visit it
upon others. (Evil)
In ovde:-v to <;e:,e:, a <;hadovv; one:, mv<;t look. 4 Aspiration. I will one day find an escape from this
condemnation. (Any)
in -the:- oppo<;ife:- divuAion of -the:- li&'t The:
S Self.Serving. The petty concerns of other creatures
<;ame:, c.-an De:- <;aid fov a <;hadow dva~n.
are of no concern to me. I have enough to occupy
-fiz.ban my attention. (Neutral)
6 Compassion. My existence is misery, and no one
else should have to suffer such torment. (Good)
Use the tables and other information in this section
to craft unique encounters with shadow dragons.
SHADOW DRAGON ADVENTURES
CREATING A SHADOW DRAGON The Shadow Dragon Adventure Hooks table offers
suggestions for stories and adventures involving
Use the Shadow Dragon Personality Traits and
shadow dragons.
Shadow Dragon Ideals tables to inspire your por
trayal of distinctive shadow dragon characters.
SHADOW DRAGON ADVENTURE HOOKS
If you use the variant rule in the Monster Manual
for making a dragon a spellcaster, shadow dragons d8 Adventure Hook
typically have the spellcasting ability of their origi A shadow dragon hunts the descendants of the
nal forms. Over time, some shadow dragons might miners who, centuries ago, uncovered the Shadow
replace one or more of their innate spells with spells fell portal that caused the dragon's corruption.
more appropriate to their tenebrous nature, such as
2 A magical catastrophe has transported a town into
darkness, fog cloud, misty step, or nondetection.
the Underdark. The only path back to the surface
goes directly through a shadow dragon's lair.
SHADOW DRAGON PERSONALITY TRAITS
3 A young woman seeks heroes to retrieve a family
d8 Trait
heirloom stolen from her. The woman is actually a
I am a creature of endless consumption, always
night hag, the heirloom is her heartstone, and the
looking for the next thing to possess or devour.
thief is a shadow dragon in Humanoid guise.
2 I am rarely satisfied with what I have. I envy others'
4 As war brews in a Material Plane world, a shrewd
lives and belongings.
shadow dragon exploits a convergence with the
3 I'm constantly calculating my next move. If I'm not
Shadowfell to establish a cross-planar arms trade.
at least one step ahead of foes, I'm a step behind.
5 A hundred years ago, a savvy ruler bargained with
4 I loathe my existence, and the only thing that
a dragon to ensure the safety of the populace. The
pleases me is sharing my misery.
treaty is about to expire and must be renegotiated,
S It isn't that I'm unsympathetic to others' needs; I but in the intervening century, the dragon has fallen
just don't let sympathy get in the way. to shadow.
6 Everything is a transaction. I don't do anything be 6 A group of shadar-kai (elves native to the Shadow
fore I know what's in it for me. fell) arrive at a city's gates, seeking refuge. They are
7 It's nearly impossible for me to conceal my con fleeing the despotic rule of a shadow dragon-but
tempt for others. fail to mention that the dragon pursues them.
8 I truly regret the things I have done and will do 7 A shadow dragon has seized control of a city's
whatever I can to atone. criminal underworld. Those who want to depose
the dragon face an army of assassins and Undead
SHADOW DRAGON IDEALS shadows.
d6 Ideal 8 Night after night, innocent folk are drained of their
Merciless. Life doesn't offer second chances, and life's energy and rise as shadows. A shadow dragon
neither do I. (Lawful) living in the area is suspected of the foul murders,
