CHAPTER 2 I DRAGON MAGIC 19
=== PAGE 21 ===
Se-ho{ay<; have, e,nga~ in [e,?1
cle,bate,<; oVe,y whe,fhe,y oY not fhi<; <;pe,/1
<;hov[cl pYope,y/1 be, attYibvfocl to me,.
ltone,<;t/~, l\1e, c.,ve,ate,cl <;o man1 fhi~, I
e,,an,t ye,a/11 ke,e,p mc.k- of fhe,m al/.
-nzban
, Evasion. If the creature is subjected to an effect that
allows it to make a Dexterity saving throw to take
only half damage, the creature instead takes no
damage if it succeeds on the saving throw, and
only half damage if it fails.
As a bonus action on subsequent turns, you can
move the field to another creature within 60 feet of
the field.
NATHAIR'S MISCHIEF
2nd-Level Illusion
,I Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: S, M (a piece of crust from an
apple pie)
Breath Weapon. When you cast this spell, and as a Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
bonus action on subsequent turns for the duration,
You fill a 20-foot cube you can see within range
you can exhale shimmering energy in a 60-foot
with fey and draconic magic. Roll on the Mischie
cone. Each creature in that area must make a
vous Surge table to determine the magical effect
Dexterity saving throw, taking 6d8 force damage
produced, and roll again at the start of each of your
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a suc
turns until the spell ends. You can move the cube up
cessful one.
to 10 feet before you roll.
Wings. Incorporeal wings sprout from your back,
giving you a flying speed of 60 feet.
MISCHIEVOUS SURGE
FIZBAN'S PLATINUM SHIELD d4 Effect
6th-Level Abjuration
The smell of apple pie fills the air, and each crea
Casting Time: 1 bonus action ture in the cube must succeed on a Wisdom saving
Range: 60 feet throw or become charmed by you until the start of
Components: V, S, M (a platinum-plated dragon
your next turn.
scale, worth at least 500 gp)
2 Bouquets offlowers appear all around, and each
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
creature in the cube must succeed on a Dexterity
You create a field of silvery light that surrounds saving throw or be blinded until the start of your
a creature of your choice within range (you can
next turn as the flowers spray water in their faces.
choose yourself). The field sheds dim light out to 5
3 Each creature in the cube must succeed on a
feet. While surrounded by the field, a creature gains
Wisdom saving throw or begin giggling until the
the following benefits:
start of your next turn. A giggling creature is inca
Cover. The creature has half cover.
pacitated and uses all its movement to move in a
Damage Resistance. The creature has resistance
random direction.
to acid, cold, fire, lightning, and poison damage.
4 Drops of molasses hover in the cube, making it dif
ficult terrain until the start of your next turn.
20 CHAPTER 2 I DRAGON MAGIC
=== PAGE 22 ===
RAULOTHIM'S PSYCHIC LANCE Components: S, M (a vial of meltwater)
4th-Level Enchantment Duration: Instantaneous
Casting Time: 1 action A burst of cold energy emanates from you in a 30-
Range: 120 feet foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a
Components: V Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a crea
Duration: Instantaneous ture takes 3d8 cold damage and is hindered by ice
formations for 1 minute, or until it or another crea
You unleash a shimmering lance of psychic power
ture within reach of it uses an action to break away
from your forehead at a creature that you can see
the ice. A creature hindered by ice has its speed
within range. Alternatively, you can utter a crea
reduced to 0. On a successful save, a creature takes
ture's name. If the named target is within range, it
half as much damage and isn't hindered by ice.
becomes the spell's target even if you can't see it. If
At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using
the named target isn't within range, the lance dissi
a spell slot of 3rd level or higher, increase the cold
pates without effect.
damage by ld8 for each slot level above 2nd.
The target must make an Intelligence saving
throw. On a failed save, the target takes 7d6 psychic
SUMMON DRACONIC SPIRIT
damage and is incapacitated until the start of your
5th-Level Conjuration
next turn. On a successful save, the creature takes
Casting Time: 1 action
half as much damage and isn't incapacitated.
Range: 60 feet
At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using
Components: V, S, M (an object with the image of a
a spell slot of 5th level or higher, the damage in
dragon engraved on it, worth at least 500 gp)
creases by ld6 for each slot level above 4th.
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
RIME'S BINDING ICE
2nd-Level Evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self (30-foot cone)
.,
=== PAGE 23 ===
MAGIC ITEMS
DRACONIC SPIRIT
Large Dragon, Neutral
If 10v happe-n to fnd ~ovv~e-lf in po~~~~ion
Armor Class 14 + the level of the spell (natural armor)
of a plafit1vM ~c.-avFt be- pve-pave-d fov
Hit Points 50 + 10 for each spell level above 5th (the dragon
has a number of Hit Dice [dl0s] equal to the level of the spell)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft. ~ide- qfe,c.,t~: he-ad ~wive-I~, ~~p~ of
adMivafiot1, and M1viad C-OMpliMe-nt(
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 14 (+2) 17 (+3) 10 (+0) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) -fizban
Damage Resistances (Chromatic and Metallic Only) acid, cold,
fire, lightning, poison
The following magic items are presented in alpha
Damage Resistances (Gem Only) force, necrotic, psychic,
betical order.
radiant, thunder
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
AMETHYST LODESTONE
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Draconic, understands the languages you speak Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement)
Challenge - Proficiency Bonus equals your bonus This fist-sized chunk of amethyst is infused with
an amethyst dragon's ability to bend gravitational
Shared Resistances. When you summon the dragon, choose
forces. While you are carrying the lodestone, you
one of its damage resistances. You have resistance to the cho
have advantage on Strength saving throws.
sen damage type until the spell ends.
The lodestone has 6 charges for the following
ACTIONS properties, which you can use while you are holding
Multiattack. The dragon makes a number of Rend attacks the stone. The stone regains ld6 expended charges
equal to half the spell's level (rounded down), and it uses daily at dawn.
Breath Weapon. Flight. As a bonus action, you can expend 1
Rend. Melee Weapon Attack: your spell attack modifier to hit, charge to gain the power of flight for 10 minutes.
reach 10 ft., one target. Hit: ld6 + 4 + the spell's level pierc For the duration, you gain a flying speed equal to
ing damage. your walking speed, and you can hover.
Breath Weapon. The dragon exhales destructive energy in a Gravitational Thrust. As an action, you can ex
30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a Dexterity pend 1 charge to focus gravity around a creature
saving throw against your spell save DC. A creature takes 2d6 you can see within 60 feet of you. The target must
damage of a type this dragon has resistance to (your choice) on
succeed on a DC 18 Strength saving throw or be
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
pushed up to 20 feet in a direction of your choice.
Reverse Gravity. As an action, you can expend
You call forth a draconic spirit. It manifests in an
3 charges to cast reverse gravity from the stone
unoccupied space that you can see within range.
(save DC 18).
This corporeal form uses the Draconic Spirit stat
block. When you cast this spell, choose a family of
CRYSTAL BLADE
dragon: chromatic, gem, or metallic. The creature
Weapon (Any Sword), Rare (Requires Attunement)
resembles a dragon of the chosen family, which de
This magic sword's blade is fashioned from a horn
termines certain traits in its stat block. The creature
or spine from a crystal dragon. When you hit with
disappears when it drops to 0 hit points or when the
an attack roll using this sword, the target takes an
spell ends.
extra ld8 radiant damage.
The creature is an ally to you and your compan
The sword has 3 charges and regains ld3 ex
ions. In combat, the creature shares your initiative
pended charges daily at dawn. When you hit a crea
count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours.
ture with an attack roll using the sword, you can ex
It obeys your verbal commands (no action required
pend 1 charge to regain a number of hit points equal
by you). If you don't issue any, it takes the Dodge ac
to the extra radiant damage the sword dealt.
tion and uses its move to avoid danger.
While you're holding the sword, you can use a
At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using
bonus action to cause it to shed bright light in a 30-
a spell slot of 6th level or higher, use the higher level
foot radius and dim light for an additional 30 feet,
wherever the spell's level appears in the stat block.
to cause it to shed dim light in a 10-foot radius, or to
douse the light.
22 CHAPTER 2 I DRAGON MAGIC
I I .a
=== PAGE 24 ===
DRAGONHIDE BELT attack and damage rolls made with this flail. When
Wondrous Item, Uncommon (+1), Rare (+2), or Very you hit with an attack roll using it, the target takes
Rare (+3) (Requires Attunement by a Monk) an extra 5d4 damage of your choice of one of the
following damage types: acid, cold, fire, lightning,
This finely detailed belt is made of dragonhide.
or poison.
While wearing it, you gain a bonus to the saving
While holding the flail, you can use an action
throw DCs of your ki features. The bonus is deter
and speak a command word to cause the heads
mined by the belt's rarity.
to breathe multicolored flames in a 90-foot cone.
In addition, you can use an action to regain ki
Each creature in that area must make a DC 18 Dex
points equal to a roll of your Martial Arts die. You
terity saving throw. On a failed save, it takes 14d6
can't use this action again until the next dawn.
damage of one of the following damage types (your
DRAGONLANCE choice): acid, cold, fire, lightning, or poison. On a
Weapon (Lance or Pike), Legendary (Requires At successful save, it takes half as much damage. Once
tunement) this action is used, it can't be used again until the
next dawn.
A dragonlance is a renowned weapon forged from
rare metal with the aid of powerful artifacts asso
GOLD CANARY FIGURINE OF
ciated with Bahamut. Different lances are forged WONDROUS POWER
for use by foot soldiers (as pikes) and by riders (as Wondrousitem,Legendary
lances), but the magical properties of the weapons
This gold statuette is carved in the likeness of a ca
are the same.
nary and is small enough to fit in a pocket. If you use
You gain a +3 bonus to attack and damage rolls
an action to speak the command word and throw
made with this magic weapon.
the figurine to a point on the ground within 60 feet
When you hit a Dragon with this weapon, the
of you, the figurine becomes a living creature in
Dragon takes an extra 3d6 force damage, and any
one of two forms (you choose). If there isn't enough
Dragon of your choice that you can see within 30
space for the creature where it would appear, the
feet of you can immediately use its reaction to make
figurine doesn't become a creature. The two forms
a melee attack.
are as follows:
DRAGON WING Bow Giant Canary Form. The figurine becomes a giant
Weapon (Any Bow), Rare (Requires Attunement) canary (see the accompanying stat block) for up
The limb tips of this magic bow are shaped like a to 8 hours and can be ridden as a mount. Once
dragon's wings, and the weapon is infused with the the figurine has become a giant canary, it can't be
essence of a chromatic, gem, or metallic dragon's used this way again until the next dawn.
breath. When you hit with an attack roll using this Gold Dragon Form. While you are missing half or
magic bow, the target takes an extra ld6 damage more of your hit points, you can speak a different
of the same type as the breath infused in the bow command word and the figurine becomes an
acid, cold, fire, force, lightning, necrotic, poison, psy adult gold dragon (see its stat block in the Mon
chic, radiant, or thunder. ster Manual) for up to 1 hour. The dragon can't
If you load no ammunition in the weapon, it pro use any legendary actions or lair actions. Once the
duces its own, automatically creating one piece of
magic ammunition when you pull back the string. GIANT CANARY
The ammunition created by the bow vanishes the Large Beast, Unaligned
instant after it hits or misses a target.
Armor Class 12
EMERALD PEN Hit Points 26 (4dl0 + 4)
Wondrous Item, Uncommon Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
This pen is tipped with an emerald nib and requires STR DEX CON
no ink to write. While holding this pen, you can 10 (+0) 14 (+2) 12 (+l)
cast illusory script at will, requiring no material
components. Senses passive Perception 10
Languages-
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
FLAIL OF TIAMAT
Weapon (Flail), Legendary (Requires Attunement)
ACTIONS
This magic flail is made in the image of Tiamat,
with five jagged heads shaped like the heads of five Peck. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ldl0 + 2) piercing damage.
different chromatic dragons. You gain a +3 bonus to
CHAPTER 2 I DRAGON MAGIC 23
=== PAGE 25 ===
figurine has become an adult gold dragon, it can't own, but you retain your languages, personality, and
be used this way again until 1 year has passed. memories. You can't use a dragon's Change Shape
or its legendary or lair actions.
In either form, the creature is friendly to you and
your companions. It understands your languages
RUBY WEAVE GEM
and obeys your spoken commands. If you issue no
Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement
commands, the creature defends itself but takes no
by a Spellcaster)
other actions.
While you are holding this gem, you can use it as a
The creature exists for a duration specific to each
spellcasting focus for your spells.
form. At the end of the duration, the creature reverts
The gem has 3 charges and regains all expended
to its figurine form. It reverts to a figurine early if it
charges daily at dawn. When you cast a spell while
drops to O hit points or if you use an action to speak
holding this gem, you can expend up to 3 charges to
the command word again while touching it. When
ignore the spell's material components with a gold
the creature becomes a figurine again, its property
piece cost, up to 500 gp per charge expended.
can't be used again until a certain amount of time
When you finish a Jong rest, choose a spell from
has passed, as specified in the description.
any class list. The spell you choose must be of a
PLATINUM SCARF level you can cast. You know the chosen spell and
Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement) can cast it with your spell slots of the appropriate
level until the end of your next long rest.
This scarf is made of sturdy cloth and covered in
platinum-colored scales.
SAPPHIRE BUCKLER
As an action, you can pull a scale from the scarf
Armor (Shield), Very Rare (Requires Attunement)
and speak a command word. When you do so,
This crystalline blue shield is fashioned from a sap
choose one of the following effects:
phire dragon's scale and is created to aid in rooting
Breath of Life. The scale disappears, and you or a out the influence of Aberrations. While wielding the
creature you touch regains 10d4 hit points. shield, you have resistance to psychic and thunder
Platinum Shield. For 1 hour or until you dismiss damage. Also, when you take damage from a crea
it (no action required), the scale becomes a +l ture that is within 5 feet of you, you can use your re
shield, which you or another creature can use. A action to deal 2d6 thunder damage to that creature.
creature wielding the shield has immunity to radi As an action, you can use the shield to help you
ant damage. locate Aberrations until the end of your next turn. If
Radiant Hammer. For 1 hour or until you dismiss any Aberrations are within 1 mile of you, the shield
it (no action required), the scale becomes a magic emits a low humming tone for a moment, and you
light hammer, which you or another creature know the direction of all Aberrations within that
can use. The weapon deals 2d4 radiant damage, range. Once this property is used, it can't be used
instead of the bludgeoning damage normal for a again until the next dawn.
light hammer. It deals an extra 2d4 radiant dam
age to chromatic dragons. TOPAZ ANNIHILATOR
Weapon (Firearm), Legendary (Requires Attunement)
Once three scales have been pulled from the scarf,
This magic ranged weapon resembles a musket, but
no more scales can be removed until the next dawn,
in lieu of any ammunition, it holds a glowing yellow
when all the missing scales grow back. If you pull
scale from a topaz dragon in its heart.
off a scale but don't speak a command word, it dis
The weapon has a normal range of 100 feet and
appears after 1 minute.
a long range of 300 feet, and it has the two-handed
POTION OF DRAGON'S MAJESTY property. It deals 2d6 necrotic damage on a hit. If
Potion, Legendary this damage reduces a creature or object to O hit
points, the target is reduced to dust. A creature re
This potion looks like liquid gold, with a single
duced to dust can be restored to life only by a true
scale from a chromatic, gem, or metallic dragon
resurrection or wish spell.
suspended in it. When you drink this potion, you
While the weapon is on your person, you can use
transform into an adult dragon of the same kind as
an action to cast the disintegrate spell (save DC 18).
the dragon the scale came from. The transformation
Once this property is used, it can't be used again un
lasts for 1 hour. Any equipment you are wearing or
til the next dawn.
carrying melds into your new form or falls to the
ground (your choice). For the duration, you use the
game statistics of the adult dragon instead of your
~
24 CHAPTER 2 I DRAGON MAGIC
=== PAGE 26 ===
HOARD MAGIC ITEMS associated with the dragon's age-putting a Wak
ened item in a slain adult dragon's hoard does not
make it Ascendant, for example.
I've. le.+ acive.rrtvve.v<; pvt the.iv +01<; in
DECREASING POWER
m1 hoavci to <;te.e.p onc.-e. ov fwic.-e.. I c..-an
Just as hoard items can grow in power by absorbing
ne.ve.v !Ft a 5°oc1 niyit~ <;le.e.p while. the ambient magic of a dragon's hoard, so too can
these treasures fall back into slumber. If no creature
the.1've. the.ve., thovy,. It~ like. an itc..-h.
is attuned to a hoard item and that item isn't in a
-riz.ban dragon's hoard, the item decreases in power by one
state every 30 days until it is Slumbering.
Certain magic items can absorb the ambient magic
HOARDITEMQ;~U_I_R_K_S_ _____
of a dragon's hoard. The mightier the dragon, the
Hoard items often manifest strange qualities be
more powerful the item becomes when it is steeped
yond their intended function, regardless of the state
in the dragon's hoard. These items, called hoard
they're in. Roll once on the Draconic Quirks table to
items, have four states, which are summarized on
determine the quirk of a hoard item.
the Hoard Item States table. A hoard item in its
Slumbering state has certain base properties, and it
DRACONIC QUIRKS
gains additional properties when it enters the Stir
ring, Wakened, or Ascendant state. d8 Quirk
When resting on the ground, the item points in the
HOARD ITEM STATES direction of the last hoard it steeped in.
State Age 2 The item's bearer can speak and understand Dra
Slumbering conic.
Stirring Young 3 The item glows softly when within 60 feet of a
Wakened Adult Dragon or another hoard item.
Ascendant Ancient 4 The item's bearer gains a swimming speed equal to
their walking speed.
INCREASING POWER
5 The item's bearer has advantage on Intelligence
A hoard item left to steep in a dragon's hoard ab (History) checks.
sorbs power from the hoard. Older dragons' hoards
6 The item's bearer has advantage on Charisma (In
are charged with more magic and can empower
timidation) checks made against non-Dragons.
hoard items to higher states.
7 The item grants its bearer resistance to the damage
Ordinarily, a hoard item must steep in a dragon's
type of the breath weapon of the last dragon whose
hoard for 1 year to reach the maximum possible
state allowed by the age of the hoard's dragon, as hoard the item steeped in.
shown on the Hoard Item States table. For exam 8 The item's bearer dreams of the dragon whose
ple, a hoard item that steeps in a young dragon's hoard the item last steeped in.
hoard for 1 year enters its Stirring state, while one
that steeps in an ancient dragon's hoard for 1 year HOARD ITEM DESCRIPTIONS
reaches the pinnacle of its power and enters its As
Hoard items are presented here in alphabetical or
cendant state. If there are one or more hoard items
der. A hoard item's rarity changes depending on its
steeping in a dragon's hoard, the dragon is aware
current state, as shown in each item description.
of them. The dragon also knows what these hoard
items are and what state (Slumbering, Stirring, DRAGON'S WRATH WEAPON
Wakened, or Ascendant) each of them is in. Weapon (Any), Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement)
When a dragon is slain, the magic surrounding
This weapon is decorated with dragon heads, claws,
its hoard becomes volatile. This allows a hoard
wings, scales, or Draconic letters. When it steeps in
item to steep more quickly in the hoard. A hoard
a dragon's hoard, it absorbs the energy of the drag
item steeped in a dragon's hoard for 8 hours rises
on's breath weapon and deals damage of that type
one state (from Slumbering to Stirring, Stirring to
with its special properties.
Wakened, or Wakened to Ascendant), as long as the
Slumbering (Uncommon). Whenever you roll
steeping begins within 1 hour of the dragon's death
a 20 on your attack roll with this weapon, each
and occurs within the dragon's lair. Steeping in this
creature of your choice within 5 feet of the target
way can't raise the state of the item beyond the state
CHAPTER 2 j DRAGON MAGIC 25
=== PAGE 27 ===
takes 5 damage of the type dealt by the dragon's DRAGON-TOUCHED Focus
breath weapon. Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement
Stirring (Rare). The Stirring weapon has the by a Spellcaster)
Slumbering property. In addition, you gain a +1
This wondrous item can be a scepter, an orb, an
bonus to attack and damage rolls made using
amulet, a crystal, or another finely crafted object. It
the weapon. On a hit, the weapon deals an ex
typically incorporates imagery of dragons' wings,
tra ld6 damage of the type dealt by the dragon's
claws, teeth, or scales.
breath weapon.
Slumbering (Uncommon). You have advantage
Wakened (Very Rare). The Wakened weapon has
on initiative rolls. While you are holding the fo
the Slumbering property, and it improves on the
cus, it can function as a spellcasting focus for all
Stirring property. The bonus to attack and damage
your spells.
rolls increases to +2, and the extra damage dealt by
Stirring (Rare). The Stirring focus has the Slum
the weapon increases to 2d6.
bering property, and it gains an additional property
As an action, you can unleash a 30-foot cone of
determined by the family of the dragon in whose
destructive energy from the weapon. Each creature
hoard it became Stirring:
in that area must make a DC 16 Dexterity saving
throw, taking 8d6 damage of the type dealt by the Chromatic. Whenever you use a spell slot to cast
dragon's breath weapon on a failed save, or half as a spell that deals acid, cold, fire, lightning, or
much damage on a successful one. Once this action poison damage, roll a d6, and you gain a bonus
is used, it can't be used again until the next dawn. equal to the number rolled to one of the spell's
Ascendant (Legendary). The Ascendant weapon damage rolls.
has the Slumbering property, and it improves on the Gem. Whenever you use a spell slot to cast a spell,
Stirring and Wakened properties. The bonus to at you can immediately teleport to an unoccupied
tack and damage rolls increases to +3 , and the extra space you can see within 15 feet of you.
damage dealt by the weapon increases to 3d6. Metallic. When a creature you can see within 30
The cone of destructive energy the weapon cre feet of you makes a saving throw, you can use your
ates increases to a 60-foot cone, the save DC in reaction to give that creature advantage on the
creases to 18, and the damage increases to 12d6. saving throw.
Wakened (Very Rare). The Wakened focus has
the Slumbering and Stirring properties, and while
you are holding a Wakened focus, you can use it to
cast certain spells. Once the item is used to cast a
given spell, it can't be used to cast that spell again
until the next dawn. The spells are determined by
the family of the dragon in whose hoard it became
Wakened. An asterisk indicates a new spell that ap
pears earlier in this chapter.
Chromatic. Hold monster, Rime's binding ice*
Gem. Rary's telepathic bond, Raulothim's
psychic lance*
Metallic. Fizban's platinum shield,* legend lore
Ascendant (Legendary). The Ascendant focus
has the Slumbering, Stirring, and Wakened prop
erties. In addition, when you cast a spell of 1st level
or higher while holding this focus, you can treat the
spell as if it were cast using a 9th-level spell slot.
Once this property is used, it can't be used again un
til the next dawn.
=== PAGE 28 ===
DRAGON VESSEL DRACONIC GIFTS
Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement)
This vessel can be a potion bottle, drinking horn, or Yov /:::.now the- pvove-Yb: don, t look- a
other container meant to hold a liquid.
j.ft-
Slumbering (Uncommon). As a bonus action, if clv-ac..onic..- in the- Movth. Some, ~a1 itt
the vessel is empty, you can speak the command
be,e,.av~e, of the- bve-ath we-apon. Bvt ve-a/11
word to fill the vessel with one of the following (your
choice): ale, olive oil, a potion ofh ealing, or a potion ,tt the, ~Me-II.
of climbing. Once this property is used, it can't be
-fizban
used until the next dawn. A potion you create in this
way loses its magical properties if it isn't imbibed
within 24 hours.
As described in chapter 3, the death of a dragon
Stirring (Rare). In addition to the options for a
can result in its power taking root in a character,
Slumbering vessel, you can fill a Stirring vessel
whether that person is the dragon's chosen heir
with mead, a potion of fire breath, or a potion of
or the dragon's killer. The result of this investiture
healing (greater).
can vary widely in power and impact, from a minor
Wakened (Very Rare). In addition to the options
charm to a complete transformation.
for a Slumbering or Stirring vessel, you can fill a
Sometimes, a draconic gift has an obvious visual
Wakened vessel with wine, a potion of flying, or a
manifestation, such as when a character is trans
potion ofh ealing (superior).
formed into a dragonborn. Other gifts are invisible,
Ascendant (Legendary). In addition to the op
but no less potent. But on some worlds, the inves
tions for other states, you can fill an Ascendant
titure of draconic power is accompanied by some
vessel with whiskey, a potion ofh ealing (supreme),
kind of physical manifestation, especially if it's
or a potion ofd ragon's majesty (described earlier in
derived from slaying a dragon. It might be small
this chapter).
and easily hidden, but those who know to look can
usually identify a dragonslayer (or another character
SCALED ORNAMENT
who carries a draconic gift) by a telltale sign. The
Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement)
Draconic Marks table suggests some possibilities of
This ornament can be jewelry, a cloak, or another
what these marks might look like.
wearable accessory. It appears to be fashioned from
a dragon's scale, tooth, or claw, or it incorporates DRACONIC MARKS
images in those shapes.
d4 Visual Manifestation
Slumbering (Uncommon). You have advantage
One or both of the character's eyes change color
on saving throws you make to avoid being charmed
to resemble the dragon's eyes or scales.
or frightened or to end those conditions on you.
Stirring (Rare). You gain a +l bonus to AC, and 2 The character's hair {or a streak ofit) changes
you can't be charmed or frightened. Moreover, each color to match the color of the dragon's scales.
creature of your choice within 30 feet of you has 3 A mark like a stylized dragon eye or claw appears
advantage on saving throws it makes to avoid being
on the body.
charmed or frightened or to end those conditions
4 Patches of scales appear on the character's body,
on itself.
typically on the neck, shoulders, or forearms.
Wakened (Very Rare). The Wakened ornament
has the Stirring property. In addition, when you
would take damage of the type dealt by the breath
of the dragon in whose hoard the ornament became
Wakened, you can use your reaction to take no dam
age instead, and you regain hit points equal to the
damage you would have taken. Once this property is
used, it can't be used again until the next dawn.
•
Ascendant (Legendary). The Ascendant orna
ment has the Stirring and Wakened properties. In
addition, while you are wearing the ornament, you
gain a flying speed equal to your walking speed and
can hover. While you are flying using this speed,
spectral dragon wings appear on your back.
CHAPTER 2 I DRAGON MAGIC 27
=== PAGE 29 ===
DRACONIC GIFT DESCRIPTIONS the family of the dragon that is the source of this
gift. You can keep any skill proficiencies you gained
from your previous race, or you gain proficiency in
Some- of the- /e-(;c; wmmon dvawnic..- two skills of your choice.
51ft-c; l>ve, c;e-e-n b<½towe-cJ inc..-lvde, UJvbb1
DRACONIC SENSES
Draconic Gift, Rare
e,he,e,k,c; and an adorable- nafvve-; the
You gain keen senses like a dragon's.
abilini to blow immac..-vlafo c;mofce, vi~;
Blindsight. You have blindsight to a range of
and the- innate- c;e-nc;e, of vvhe-n 1ovv ~ 10 feet. Within that range, you can effectively see
anything that isn't behind total cover, even if you're
ic; pe-vfe,c..-t/1 c;oft--boile-cJ. I wovldn>t mind blinded or in darkness. Moreover, you can see invisi
ble creatures within that range, unless the creatures
that /ac;t one- m~c;e-lf.
successfully hide from you.
