CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 159
=== PAGE 161 ===
components, naming any person, place, or object
Imprisoning Force. The dragon casts the forcecage
within 1 mile of the lair as the spell's subject.
spell, using its spell save DC and requiring no
Crystal Profusion. Amethyst crystals and geodes
spell components. The spell ends early if the
form along muddy shores and lake beds within 6
dragon uses this lair action again or dies.
Spatial Projection. The dragon chooses a space miles of the lair.
it can fit into within the lair. It exists in its own Thriving Wildlife. Fish and other aquatic Beasts
reproduce rapidly and thrive in bodies of water
space and the chosen space simultaneously until
within 6 miles of the lair. Foraging in these waters
initiative count 20 on the next round. Whenever it
yields twice the usual amount of food.
moves or takes an action, it chooses which version
Watery Sight. Water within 6 miles of the lair is a
of itself is moving or acting. If an effect or attack
conduit for the dragon's psionic presence. As an
can target both of the dragon's spaces at the same
action, the dragon can cast the clairvoyance spell,
time, the dragon is affected only once.
requiring no spell components and targeting any
REGIONAL EFFECTS body of water in that region.
The region surrounding a legendary amethyst drag
If the dragon dies, the populations of aquatic life
on's lair is altered by the dragon's magic, creating
near the lair return to normal levels over the course
one or more of the following effects:
of ldlO days. The existing abundance of amethysts
Background Check. Once per day, the dragon remains, but new crystals and geodes form at a
can cast the legend lore spell, requiring no spell normal rate.
ANCIENT AMETHYST DRAGON creature takes 63 (14d8) force damage, and its speed becomes
0 until the start of the dragon's next turn. On a successful
Gargantuan Dragon (Gem), Typically Neutral
save, the creature takes half as much damage, and its speed
isn't reduced.
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 444 (24d20 + 192) Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft. (hover), swim 40 ft. spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence
as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 23, +15 to hit with
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA spell attacks):
26 (+8) 14 (+2) 27 (+8) 26 (+8) 19 (+4) 23 (+6)
1/day each: blink, control water, dispel magic.freedom of move
ment, globe ofi nvulnerability, plane shift, protection from evil
Saving Throws Dex +9, Con + 15, Wis +1 1, Cha + 13
and good, sending
Skills Arcana +22, Perception +18, Persuasion +13, Stealth +9
Damage Resistances force, psychic
BONUS ACTIONS
Condition Immunities frightened, prone ~~• •• ,d w· ~- :
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., • · ,-- c ..,,.. ,' _ Change Shape. The dragon magically transforms into any crea
passive Perception 28 ture that is Medium or Small, while retaining its game statistics
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft. (other than its size). This transformation ends if the dragon is
Challenge 23 (50,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7 reduced to O hit points or uses a bonus action to end it.
Psychic Step. The dragon magically teleports to an unoccupied
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe both air and water.
space it can see within 60 feet of it.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. LEGENDARY ACTIONS
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
ACTIONS
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
Claw attacks. dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: + 15 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. Claw. The dragon makes one Claw attack.
Hit: 19 (2dl0 + 8) piercing damage plus 13 (3d8) force damage. Psionics (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon uses Psychic Step or
Spellcasting.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack:+1 5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Explosive Crystal (Costs 3 Actions). The dragon spits an ame
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage. thyst that explodes at a point it can see within 60 feet of it.
Singularity Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon creates a Each creature within a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on that
shining bead of gravitational force in its mouth, then releases point must succeed on a DC 23 Dexterity saving throw or
take 18 (4d8) force damage and be knocked prone.
the energy in a 90-foot cone. Each creature in that area must
make a DC 23 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the
160 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
I
=== PAGE 162 ===
ADULT AMETHYST DRAGON the energy in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must
make a DC 20 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the
Huge Dragon (Gem), Typically Neutral
creature takes 45 (10d8) force damage, and its speed becomes
0 until the start of the dragon's next turn. On a successful
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
save, the creature takes half as much damage, and its speed
Hit Points 229 (17dl2 + 119)
isn't reduced.
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft. (hover), swim 40 ft.
Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
25 (+7) 14 (+2) 25 (+7) 20 (+5) 17 (+3) 21 (+5) the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 18):
1/day each: blink, control water, dispel magic, protection from evil
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +12, Wis +8, Cha +10
and good, sending
Skills Arcana +15, Perception +13, Persuasion +10, Stealth +7
Damage Resistances force, psychic
BONUS ACTIONS
Condition Immunities frightened, prone
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., Change Shape. The dragon magically transforms into any crea
passive Perception 23 ture that is Medium or Small, while retaining its game statistics
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft. (other than its size). This transformation ends if the dragon is
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5 reduced to O hit points or uses a bonus action to end it.
Psychic Step. The dragon magically teleports to an unoccupied
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe both air and water.
space it can see within 60 feet of it. ..
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. LEGENDARY ACTIONS
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
ACTIONS
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
Claw attacks. dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. Claw. The dragon makes one Claw attack.
Hit: 18 (2dl0 + 7) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8) force damage. Psionics (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon uses Psychic Step or
Spellcasting.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Explosive Crystal (Costs 3 Actions). The dragon spits an ame
Hit: 11 (ld8 + 7) slashing damage.
thyst that explodes at a point it can see within 60 feet of it.
Singularity Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon creates a Each creature within a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on that
shining bead of gravitational force in its mouth, then releases point must succeed on a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw or
take 13 (3d8) force damage and be knocked prone.
YOUNG AMETHYST DRAGON ACTIONS
Large Dragon (Gem), Typically Neutral Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit Points 168 (16dl0 + 80)
Hit: 16 (2dl0 + 5) piercing damage plus 4 (ld8) force damage.
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft. (hover), swim 40 ft.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA Hit: 9 (ld8 + 5) slashing damage.
21 (+5) 12 (+l) 21 (+5) 18 (+4) 15 (+2) 19 (+4)
Singularity Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon creates a shin
ing bead of gravitational force in its mouth, then releases the
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +9, Wis +6, Cha +8
energy in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make
Skills Arcana +12, Perception +10, Persuasion +8, Stealth +5
a DC 17 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature
Damage Resistances force, psychic
Condition Immunities frightened, prone takes 36 (8d8) force damage, and its speed becomes O until the
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., start of the dragon's next turn. On a successful save, the crea
passive Perception 20 ture takes half as much damage, and its speed isn't reduced.
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft. Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 16):
Amphibious. The dragon can breathe both air and water.
1/day each: blink, dispel magic, protection from evil and
good, sending
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 161
=== PAGE 163 ===
Whie-h e--ame- f V~'G -the- tym ov fhe
dvas:on? Not a viddle-, ae--fva/1~-it vva~
-the- dvas:on.
AMETHYST DRAGON WYRMLING Amphibious. The dragon can breathe both air and water.
Medium Dragon (Gem), Typically Neutral
ACTIONS
Armor Class 17 (natural armor) Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit Points 75 (10d8 + 30) Hit: 9 (ldl0 + 4) piercing damage plus 4 (ld8) force damage.
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. (hover), swim 30 ft. Singularity Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon creates a shin
ing bead of gravitational force in its mouth, then releases the
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
energy in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make
19 (+4) 10 (+0) 17 (+3) 16 (+3) 13 (+l) 17 (+3)
a DC 13 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature
takes 22 (Sd8) force damage, and its speed becomes 0 until the
Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +5, Wis +3, Cha +5
start of the dragon's next turn. On a successful save, the crea
Skills Arcana +7, Perception +S, Persuasion +S, Stealth +2
ture takes half as much damage, and its speed isn't reduced.
Damage Resistances force, psychic
Condition Immunities frightened, prone Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
:
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 120 ft., spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
:;
passive Perception 15 the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 13):
Languages Draconic, telepathy 120 ft.
1/day each: protection from evil and good, Tenser'sfloating disk,
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
unseen servant
..,
162 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 164 ===
/
ANIMATED BREATH
A chromatic dragon's breath weapon is a manifesta
tion of the energy that suffuses the dragon. With suf
ficient practice, dragons can learn to draw on magic
from the Elemental Planes to shape their breath
weapons into bipedal form, creating Elemental crea dragon's is similar to a water elemental, but viscous
tures called animated breaths. Chromatic dragons and foul-looking. A green dragon's animated poison
often use these creatures as guardians for their breath looks like billowing clouds of green gas,
hoards or send them out to gather treasure from the while a white dragon's animated cold breath looks
territory around their lairs. like a walking ice sculpture with frigid air whirling
An animated breath is a bipedal creature formed around it. A blue dragon's animated lightning breath
from the same energy as the breath weapon of is a constantly shifting form of crackling lightning,
the dragon that created it. A red dragon's creation and it can suddenly vanish from one place to reap
strongly resembles a fire elemental, while a black pear in another, striking like a bolt from the blue.
ANIMATED BREATH damage, and flammable objects in the aura that aren't being
worn or carried ignite. A creature that touches the animated
Large Elemental, Typically Neutral Evil
breath or hits it with a melee attack takes 3 (ld6) fire damage.
Armor Class 15 (natural armor) or 17 (Cold form only) Putrid Aura (Acid and Poison Forms Only). A creature that
Hit Points 95 (l0dl0 + 40) starts its turn within 5 feet of the animated breath must suc
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover) ceed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned until
the start of its next turn. A creature that touches the animated
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA breath or hits it with a melee attack takes 3 (ld6) acid damage.
19 (+4) 11 (+0) 18 (+4) 6 (-2) 10 (+0) 5 (-3)
ACTIONS
Damage Resistances damage of the type matching the
Multiattack. The animated breath makes two Slam attacks.
animated breath's form (acid, cold, fire, lightning, or poison)
Condition Immunities exhaustion, paralyzed, petrified, Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
poisoned, restrained, unconscious Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 11 (2dl0) damage
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 of a type determined by the animated breath's form: acid, cold,
Languages understands Draconic but can't speak fire, lightning, or poison.
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
BONUS ACTIONS
Chromatic Form. When created, the animated breath takes one Lightning Burst (Lightning Form Only). The animated breath
of five forms, matching its creator's breath weapon: Acid, Cold, magically teleports to an unoccupied space it can see within 30
Fire, Lightning, or Poison. This form determines the creature's feet of it. Each creature with 5 feet of the animated breath after
AC, damage resistance, traits, and attacks. it teleports takes 3 (ld6) lightning damage.
Fire Aura (Fire Form Only). At the start of each of the animated
breath's turns, each creature within 5 feet ofit takes 3 (ld6) fire
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 163
=== PAGE 165 ===
ASPECT OF BAHAMUT
Known as the Platinum Dragon, Bahamut is the
patron and progenitor of metallic dragons. Since dragons. Covered in platinum scales, his physical
fleeing the First World, he has made his home in the features combine various elements of the five kinds
Seven Heavens of Mount Celestia and is often num of metallic dragons-according to some scholars,
bered among the gods of that plane. Adventurers combining them in different ways with each man
and dragons alike pray to Bahamut to uphold honor ifestation of the aspect. But Bahamut is also fond
and justice, or when they need courage to face a of traveling the Material Plane in disguise, so his
great threat. In the most dire situations, a powerful aspect might appear as a wizened old sage, a young
follower of Bahamut who makes a tremendous sac monk, or a songbird. In any form, Bahamut's aspect
rifice-a vast hoard or even the follower's own life is often accompanied by seven ancient gold dragons
might convince the god to send aid to the world in who favor disguising themselves as canaries.
the form of a divine aspect. This aspect is a physical In combat, Bahamut's enemies experience the
manifestation of the Platinum Dragon, carrying his full force of his justice, while his allies enjoy the full
memories and will-and a significant portion of his benefit of his mercy. His breath can wreak monu
formidable strength. mental destruction and work miraculous healing,
Bahamut's aspect displays the full glory of the and few things in the mortal world can cause him
Platinum Dragon, towering over even ancient lasting harm.
164 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 166 ===
Dbe,c,,-tive-1~ c;;pe-akinb of all the- ~V:gn<;,
Baharv1Vt ha<; rviade- the- be-<;t dU--1<;1on<;.
lte- ic;; al<;o the- rvio<;t hand<;orvie-. And hie;
hoav-d ic;; j~nfie,,--e,<;t
-fizban
---
ASPECT OF BAHAMUT Breath Weapon (Recharge 5-6). The aspect uses one of the fol
lowing breath weapons:
Gargantuan Dragon (Metallic), Lawful Good
Exalting Breath. The aspect exhales the restoring winds of
Armor Class 23 (natural armor) Mount Celestia in a 300-foot cone. Each creature in that area
Hit Points 585 (30d20 + 270) of the aspect's choice regains 71 (13dl0) hit points, and each
Speed 60 ft., burrow 60 ft., fly 120 ft., swim 60 ft. creature in that area of the aspect's choice that has been
dead for no longer than 1 hour is restored to life with all its
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA hit points.
30 (+10) 18 (+4) 29 (+9) 25 (+7) 28 (+9) 30 (+10) Platinum Breath. The aspect exhales radiant platinum flames in
a 300-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC
Saving Throws Con +18, Int +16, Wis +18, Cha +19 26 Dexterity saving throw, taking 66 (12dl0) radiant damage
Skills Insight +18, Perception +18, Persuasion +19 on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Damage Immunities acid, cold, fire, lightning, radiant;
BONUS ACTIONS
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Condition Immunities charmed, deafened, frightened, Change Shape. The aspect magically transforms into any Hu
paralyzed, stunned manoid or Beast, while retaining his game statistics (other than
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 28 his size). This transformation ends if the aspect is reduced to 0
Languages Common, Draconic hit points or if he uses a bonus action to end it.
Challenge 30 (155,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +9
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
Platinum Brilliance (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If
The aspect can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op
the aspect would be reduced to O hit points, his current hit
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a
point total instead resets to 500 hit points, he recharges his
time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The aspect
Breath Weapon, and he regains any expended uses of Legend
regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn.
ary Resistance. Additionally, the aspect can now use the op
tions in the "Mythic Actions" section for 1 hour. Award a party Attack. The aspect makes one Claw or Tail attack.
an additional 155,000 XP (310,000 XP total) for defeating the Furious Bite (Costs 2 Actions). The aspect makes one Bite at
aspect of Bahamut after his Platinum Brilliance activates. tack. If the attack hits a creature, the target must succeed on
a DC 27 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened of the
Legendary Resistance (5/Day). If the aspect fails a saving throw, aspect until the end of the target's next turn.
he can choose to succeed instead.
MYTHIC ACTIONS
ACTIONS
If the aspect's Platinum Brilliance trait has activated in the last
Multiattack. The aspect makes one Bite attack, one Claw at hour, he can use the options below as legendary actions.
tack, and one Tail attack.
i' Celestial Shield (Costs 2 Actions). The aspect manifests seven
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, reach 20 ft., one tar spectral ancient gold dragons around himself that protect
get. Hit: 23 (2dl2 + 10) piercing damage plus 22 (4dl0) him; he gains 77 temporary hit points until the start of his
force damage. next turn.
Celestial Lances (Costs 3 Actions). The aspect conjures four
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
enormous lances of magical force that plummet to the
Hit: 21 (2dl0 + 10) slashing damage. If the target is a Huge
ground at four different points he can see within 150 feet of
or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 20) and is re
him and then disappear. Each creature in a 20-foot-radius,
strained until this grapple ends. The aspect can have only one
100-foot-high cylinder centered on each point must succeed
creature grappled this way at a time.
on a DC 27 Dexterity saving throw or take 24 (7d6) force
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. damage. A creature in the area of more than one lance is af
Hit: 23 (2dl2 + 10) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a crea fected only once.
ture, it must succeed on a DC 27 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 165
=== PAGE 167 ===
ASPECT OF TIAMAT
The five-headed progenitor of chromatic dragons, to manifest in the Material Plane. A follower with
Tiamat embodies the vices of evil dragons. Since enough power and anger, and with a hoard worthy
the destruction of the First World, she has dwelled of ancient dragons, can sacrifice it all to unleash the
in the Nine Hells-some say by choice. But others wrath of the dragon queen on a world.
claim that she is imprisoned there to punish her for The aspect of Tiamat has the body of a titanic
the evils she perpetrated when the gods sought to dragon with five heads, each the shape and hue of a
colonize the First World with their followers. different chromatic dragon. Each head might speak
Mortals who hunger for power and wealth often separately and have different mannerisms, but they
swear fealty to Tiamat in pursuit of those goals. are all Tiamat. Once unleashed, the aspect of Tia
Many of her followers have attempted to break her mat rampages across the world, acquiring any trea
out of Avernus-and failed-but even while she re sure she can find and destroying any creature that
mains in the Nine Hells, Tiamat can send her aspect dares to cross her path.
ASPECT OF nAMAT is restrained until this grapple ends. The aspect can have only
one creature grappled this way at a time.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Armor Class 23 (natural armor) Hit: 23 (2dl2 + 10) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a crea
Hit Points 574 (28d20 + 280) . ture, it must succeed on a DC 27 Strength saving throw or be
Speed 60 ft., burrow 60 ft., fly 120 ft., swim 60 ft. ' knocked prone.
Chromatic Flames (Recharge 5-6). The aspect exhales multi
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
colored flames in a 300-foot cone. Each creature in that area
30 (+10) 14 (+2) 30 (+10) 21 (+5) 20 (+5) 26 (+8)
must make a DC 27 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save,
the creature takes 71 (lldl 2) damage of a type of the aspect's
Saving Throws Dex +11, Con +19, Wis +14, Cha +17
choosing: acid, cold, fire, lightning, or poison. On a successful
Skills Intimidation +26, Perception +23
Damage Immunities acid, cold, fire, lightning, poison; save, the creature takes half as much damage.
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened,
poisoned, stunned The aspect can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 33 tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a
Languages Common, Draconic, Infernal time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The aspect
Challenge 30 (155,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +9 regains spent legendary actions at the start of her turn.
Attack. The aspect makes one Claw or Tail attack.
Chromatic Wrath (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If the
Furious Bite (Costs 2 Actions). The aspect makes one Bite at
aspect would be reduced to O hit points, her current hit point
tack. If the attack hits a creature, the target must succeed on
total instead resets to 500 hit points, she recharges her Chro
a DC 27 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened of the
matic Flames, and she regains any expended uses of Legendary
aspect until the end of its next turn.
Resistance. Additionally, the aspect can now use the options in
the "Mythic Actions" section for l hour. Award a party an addi MYTHIC ACTIONS
tional 155,000 XP (310,000 XP total) for defeating the aspect of
If the aspect's Chromatic Wrath trait has activated in the last
Tiamat after her Chromatic Wrath activates.
hour, she can use the options below as legendary actions.
Legendary Resistance (5/Day). If the aspect fails a saving throw,
Hurl Through Avernus (Costs 2 Actions). The aspect targets a
she can choose to succeed instead.
creature she is grappling. The creature must succeed on a DC
25 Charisma saving throw or take 44 (8dl0) psychic damage
ACTIONS
and be banished to Avernus (the first layer of the Nine Hells).
Multiattack. The aspect makes one Bite attack, one Claw at At the start of the aspect's next turn, the creature reappears
tack, and one Tail attack. in an unoccupied space within l O feet of the aspect.
Chromatic Flare (Costs 3 Actions). The aspect flares with el
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, reach 20 ft., one
emental energy. Each creature of the aspect's choice in a
target. Hit: 23 (2dl2 + 10) piercing damage plus 19 (3dl2)
60-foot-radius sphere centered on her must make a DC 27
force damage.
Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar 39 (6dl 2) damage of a type chosen by the aspect: acid, cold,
get. Hit: 21 (2dl0 + 10) slashing damage. If the target is a fire, lightning, or poison. On a successful save, the creature
Huge or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 20) and takes half as much damage.
.....
166 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 168 ===

=== PAGE 169 ===
black greatwyrm Chronepsis, for example, is said
CHROMATIC GREATWYRM
to have stalked multiple worlds and devoured many
The most ancient chromatic dragons, who have sur of his echoes before withdrawing to a planar lair
vived over twelve hundred years of mortal life and in the Outlands. The red greatwyrm Ashardalon
acquired vast hoards worth millions of gold pieces, worked with a balor to ritually drain the power of
can achieve a form of apotheosis, reaching a level of his echoes, then infused their power into himself by
power approaching that of Tiamat's mighty aspect. implanting the balor where his heart had been.
The competitive avarice of dragonkind and the inter In both size and power, chromatic greatwyrms
ference of adventurers prevent most dragons from exceed even ancient dragons. The energy of their
attaining this level of power. But a chromatic dragon breath weapons courses over their bodies and
who can outwit all rivals and overcome all poten glows under their scales, and elemental forces rage
tial thieves can rise to become one of the mightiest around them when they exert their wrath. They no
of dragons. longer need to eat or drink, as their vast hoards
Often a chromatic greatwyrm's ascension in magically sustain them. And their power can raze
volves fusing the power of a single dragon's echoes a city to the ground, destroying buildings and de
across different worlds of the Material Plane. The fenders alike.
CHROMATIC GREATWYRM restrained until this grapple ends. The greatwyrm can have only
one creature grappled this way at a time.
Gargantuan Dragon (Chromatic), Typically Chaotic Evil
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +18 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target.
Armor Class 22 (natural armor) Hit: 19 (2d8 + 10) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a crea
Hit Points 533 (26d20 + 260) ture, it must succeed on a DC 26 Strength saving throw or be
Speed 60 ft., burrow 60 ft., fly 120 ft., swim 60 ft. knocked prone.
Breath Weapon (Recharge 5-6). The greatwyrm exhales a blast
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
of energy in a 300-foot cone. Each creature in that area must
30 (+10) 14 (+2) 30 (+10) 21 (+5) 20 (+5) 26 (+8)
make a DC 26 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the
creature takes 78 (12dl2) damage of a type determined by the
Saving Throws Dex +10, Con +18, Wis +13, Cha +16
greatwyrm's kind: acid (black), cold (white), fire (red), lightning
Skills Intimidation +16, Perception +21, Stealth +10
(blue), or poison (green). On a successful save, the creature
Damage Immunities acid (black), cold (white), fire (red),
lightning (blue), or poison (green) takes half as much damage.
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 31
Languages Common, Draconic The greatwyrm can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
Challenge 27 (105,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +8 the options below. Only one legendary action option can be
used at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn.
Chromatic Awakening (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The greatwyrm regains spent legendary actions at the start
If the greatwyrm would be reduced to 0 hit points, its current of its turn.
hit point total instead resets to 425 hit points, it recharges its
Attack. The greatwyrm makes one Claw or Tail attack.
Breath Weapon, and it regains any expended uses of Legendary·
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The greatwyrm beats its wings.
Resistance. Additionally, the greatwyrm can now use the op
Each creature within 30 feet of it must succeed on a DC 26
tions in the "Mythic Actions" section for l hour. Award a party
Dexterity saving throw or take 17 (2d6 + 10) bludgeoning
an additional 105,000 XP (210,000 XP total) for defeating the
damage and be knocked prone. The greatwyrm can then fly
greatwyrm after its Chromatic Awakening activates. up to half its flying speed.
Legendary Resistance (4/Day). If the greatwyrm fails a saving Arcane Spear (Costs 3 Actions). The greatwyrm creates four
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. spears of magical force. Each spear hits a creature of the
greatwyrm's choice it can see within 120 feet ofit, dealing 12
Unusual Nature. The greatwyrm doesn't require food or drink. (1 d8 + 8) force damage to its target, then disappears.
ACTIONS MYTHIC ACTIONS
Multiattack. The greatwyrm makes one Bite attack and two If the greatwyrm's Chromatic Awakening trait has activated in
Claw attacks. the last hour, it can use the options below as legendary actions.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack:+ 18 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar Bite. The greatwyrm makes one Bite attack.
get. Hit: 21 (2dl0 + 10) piercing damage plus 13 (2dl2) Chromatic Flare (Costs 2 Actions). The greatwyrm flares with el
force damage. emental energy. Each creature in a GO-foot-radius sphere cen
tered on the greatwyrm must succeed on a DC 26 Dexterity
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +18 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
saving throw or take 22 (5d8) damage of a type determined
target. Hit: 19 (2d8 + 10) slashing damage. If the target is a
by the greatwyrm's kind: acid (black), cold (white), fire (red),
Huge or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 20) and is
lightning (blue), or poison (green).
168 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 170 ===
...
'& -
•
CRYSTAL DRAGONS VISIONS IN STARLIGHT
Shimmering with radiant energy and brimming Many crystal dragons study the stars, recording
with life, crystal dragons enjoy an innate psionic their observations of the night sky and tracking the
connection to the Positive Plane that suffuses their signs written in starlight. They read these signs as
bodies as well as their personalities with light. omens, giving them glimpses of what is to come,
Though they prefer to live in desolate, frigid regions, and they eagerly examine the potential futures of
many of them are among the friendliest of dragon any creatures who come to them in peace.
kind, nurturing and optimistic. Crystal dragons' connection to the radiant forces
of the Positive Plane fosters a nurturing, optimistic
INNER GLOW attitude in most of these dragons. They sometimes
adopt the abandoned eggs or hatchlings of other
When they hatch, crystal dragons have dull gray
dragons; many a white wyrmling has been raised
scales, with a few white or clear crystalline points,
in the caring environment of a crystal dragon's lair.
allowing the wyrmlings to blend in to rocky terrain
But they fiercely oppose destructive forces in their
in the face of danger. As they age, their scales turn
home territories, which sometimes leads nearby
snow white, then slowly fade to transparency. The
frost giants and white dragons to put aside their mu
oldest crystal dragons have scales of perfect clarity
tual enmity to hunt them.
that bend and refract light, sometimes making them
difficult to see clearly.
GLITTERING HOARDS
The radiant energy of the Positive Plane shim
mers in crystal dragons' scales. It glows like star For their treasure hoards, crystal dragons prize
light between their bodies and the spines and horns diamonds and baubles that refract light, collections
that hover close to their heads and backs. These of prophecy, works on astronomy, and star charts.
horns shift with the dragon's mood: bristling with When it comes to magical treasure, they seek items
anger, lying back with fear or suspicion, and rippling and spells that predict the future, create or manipu
in side-to-side waves with amusement or joy. late light, or channel positive energy for healing and
nurturing.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 169
=== PAGE 171 ===
A CRYSTAL D RAGON'S LAIR
15 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by the
Crystal dragons dwell in cold regions, where they dragon until initiative count 20 on the next round.
construct ice and snow structures reminiscent of A creature charmed in this way obeys to the best
castles but open to the sky. Glittering crystals scat of its ability any command the dragon issues that
tered about their lairs glow with gathered starlight, isn't directly harmful to the creature.
and caves or tunnels beneath the ice and snow pro Ice Passage. The dragon can open a passage
vide protected areas for their hoards. They use their through a wall of ice or snow that is up to 5 feet
burrowing ability to dig blinds and secret passages thick, creating an opening up to 30 feet wide
throughout their lairs, allowing them to move eas and high.
ily-and potentially unnoticed. Starlight's Gleam. The dragon chooses a point it
The challenge rating of a legendary crystal dragon can see in the lair. Gleaming starlight radiates
increases by 1 when it's encountered in its lair. from that point to fill a 10-foot-radius sphere with
dim light. Each creature other than the dragon in
LAIR ACTIONS
that area when the light appears must succeed on
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the
a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or take 13 (2dl2)
dragon can take one of the following lair actions;
radiant damage and be outlined in the glow. At
the dragon can't take the same lair action two
tack rolls made against an outlined creature have
rounds in a row:
advantage, and the creature can't hide or benefit
Beguiling Whisper. The dragon telepathically whis from being invisible. The starlight and the glow
pers to one creature within range of the dragon's around any creature fades on initiative count 20
telepathy. The creature must succeed on a DC on the next round.
ANCIENT CRYSTAL DRAGON radiant damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one. The dragon then gains 25 temporary hit points
Gargantuan Dragon (Gem), Typically Chaotic Neutral
by absorbing a portion of the radiant energy.
Armor Class 20 (natural armor) Spellcasting (Psionics). The dragon casts one of the following
Hit Points 222 (12d20 + 96) spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
Speed 40 ft., burrow 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft. the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 19):
At will: dancing lights, guidance
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
1/day each: command, divination, greater restoration, hypnotic
25 (+7) 12 (+l) 26 (+8) 20 (+5) 16 (+3) 21 (+5)
pattern, invisibility
Saving Throws Dex+7, Con +14, Wis +9, Cha +11
BONUS ACTIONS
Skills Perception +15, Stealth +13, Survival +9
Damage Resistances cold, radiant Change Shape. The dragon magically transforms into any crea
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., ture that is Medium or Small, while retaining its game statistics
passive Perception 25 (other than its size). This transformation ends if the dragon is
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft. reduced to O hit points or uses a bonus action to end it.
Challenge 19 (22,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +6
Psychic Step. The dragon magically teleports to an unoccupied
space it can see within 60 feet of it.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. LEGENDARY ACTIONS
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
ACTIONS
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
Claw attacks.
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack:+1 3 to hit, reach l 5 ft., one tar
Claw. The dragon makes one Claw attack.
get. Hit: 18 (2dl0 + 7) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8) radi Psionics (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon uses Psychic Step or
ant damage. Spellcasting.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. Starlight Strike (Costs 3 Actions). The dragon releases a searing
beam of starlight at a creature that it can see within 60 feet
Hit: 14 (2d6 + 7) slashing damage.
of it. The target must succeed on a DC 19 Dexterity saving
Scintillating Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales a burst throw or take 38 (lld6) radiant damage.
of brilliant radiance in a 90-foot cone. Each creature in that area
must make a DC 22 Constitution saving throw, taking 49 (lld8)
170 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 172 ===
•
I haJ a c.--r-~<;fa( Ji-ra8'n Ye-aJ M~ forhme
REGIONAL EFFECTS
The region surrounding a legendary crystal drag onu.. A lot of c..oJ<;vval/op anJ popp~c..oc..k;
on's lair is altered by the dragon's magic, creat
to be- <;VY~ e-xu.pt foy fhe- paYi whe-ye,
ing one or more of the following effects:
Clear Skies. The skies above a crystal dragon's he- <;aiJ I~ foY~t what he- to(J me-!
lair remain clear and free of precipitation unless
That vva<; impYe,<;<;ive-(~ aCOJi-rafe-.
magically altered. Winds blow lightly, posing little
threat to those approaching the lair, and visibility -ri.z.ban
is the best possible for the time of day.
Crystal Profusion. Plentiful quartz crystals form
in natural stone within 6 miles of the lair, partic
ularly in places where natural light can shine on
Thriving Wildlife. Animal populations flourish
the crystals.
within 6 miles of the lair. Ability checks made to
Icy Sight. Ice and quartz within 6 miles of the lair
forage for food by hunting, fishing, or trapping in
become conduits for the dragon's psionic pres
