devoured god's body, and return the god to life.
CHAPTER 3 J DRAGONS IN PLAY 6I
=== PAGE 63 ===
fl"tBAN ARGUES WITH A SMUG STATUE
IN THE LAIR OF AN AMUSED BRASS DRAGON.
=== PAGE 64 ===
/'~,,t,
CHAPTF R 4
LAIRS AND HOARDS
RAGONS ARE DEEPLY CONNECTED TO THE to earth or a strange mystical crystal lies buried un
worlds in which they dwell. The magic of derground, or a place where long-forgotten wizards
the Material Plane flows through them. It of an ancient magocratic empire saturated the land
empowers their breath weapons and their with their powerful spells. As a result, a dragon's
tremendous might; it pools in their lairs lair is typically not the only unusual and magically
and tangles in the treasures of their hoards. This powerful feature in its region. You can use the Lair
chapter, intended for the Dungeon Master, explores Location table for inspiration when placing a drag
the connection between dragons and the world they on's lair in or near such a feature.
inhabit and how that connection manifests in each
dragon's lair and hoard. LAIR LOCATION
dlO Unusual Feature
"Dragon Lairs" discusses how the magic that
suffuses dragons spills out into the world around The area is a climate anomaly-a cool and lush
the locations these creatures call home. This sec oasis in a hot desert, a balmy spring within a frozen
tion includes suggestions for the kinds of locales tundra, a drifting iceberg in a warm sea, a barren
where dragons like to build their lairs, as well as waste in the midst of a verdant forest, or the like.
additional regional effects that might manifest
2 The area is a wild magic zone. Whenever a crea
around a lair. Additional lair actions round out
ture casts a spell of 1st level or higher or activates
this section.
a magic item, roll a dl0. On a l, roll on the Wild
"Dragon Hoards" explores the relationship be
Magic Surge table in the Player's Handbook.
tween the size of a dragon's hoard and the drag
on's magical might. This section discusses drag 3 Natural rock formations align with celestial phe
ons' practice of dividing their hoards into multiple nomena at particular times of the year. Stars and
caches that extend their magical reach, and the planets might line up with rock spires and windows
items that can link those caches together. It also on solstices and equinoxes, for example.
explores the magical quirks-including hauntings
4 A dead god or titan is buried in the area.
and curses-that can arise as enormous amounts
5 The area is a vast crater, at the center of which is a
of magical power are pooled in one place.
long-buried meteorite.
"What's in a Hoard?" provides tables to determine
the contents of a dragon's hoard, expanding on the 6 A magical portal to another plane of existence
treasure tables in the Dungeon Master's Guide. releases dangerous energy-and sometimes crea
tures-into the area.
DRAGON LAIRS
7 The area was a battlefield in an ancient war where
thousands of soldiers were annihilated in a devas
ttome, i~ vvhe,ye, the- ho,wd i~. tating magical assault.
-fizban 8 Gravity does not function as expected in the area,
which might manifest as giant floating earth motes
or similar terrain.
A lair is not merely a den where a dragon happens to
9 An enormous tree-possibly the oldest living
sleep. It's a nexus for all the magical energy bound
organism in the world-grows at the heart of the
up in a dragon. A dragon's lair is a home and carries
all the emotional and magical resonance of that area.
word. It's a sanctum and the repository of the drag 10 A god left a profound impression on the site during
on's hoard. It's a place of power, with echoes of its an ancient visit to the Material Plane-perhaps a
own across multiple worlds. footprint, a pool of tears, or a splash of blood that
Consciously or not, young dragons establishing has permanently infused the ground.
lairs for the first time often seek to establish them in
sites of magical resonance. A dragon might look for
a place where multiple ley lines of flowing magical
energy intersect, a site where a meteorite crashed
