LEGENDARY ACTIONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
The greatwyrm can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
target. Hit: 20 (2dl0 + 9) piercing damage plus 16 (3dl0)
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be
force damage.
used at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar The greatwyrm regains spent legendary actions at the start
get. Hit: 18 (2d8 + 9) slashing damage. If the target is a Huge of its turn.
or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 19) and is re
Claw. The greatwyrm makes one Claw attack.
strained until this grapple ends. The greatwyrm can have only
Psionics (Costs 2 Actions). The greatwyrm uses Psychic Step or
one creature grappled in this way at a time.
Spellcasting.
Breath Weapon (Recharge 5-6). The greatwyrm exhales crush Psychic Beam (Costs 3 Actions). The greatwyrm emits a beam
ing force in a 300-foot cone. Each creature in that area must of psychic energy in a 90-foot line that is 10 feet wide. Each
make a DC 25 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature in that area must make a DC 26 Intelligence saving
creature takes 71 (lldl2) force damage and is knocked prone. throw, taking 27 (5dl0) psychic damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 201
=== PAGE 203 ===
GEM STALKER
A gem stalker has a four-legged body resem
When a gem dragon kills an aberrant creature from bling that of a wingless dragon, but with a vaguely
the Far Realm, the dragon sometimes reshapes the humanlike torso, head, and arms in place of the
alien corpse into a gem stalker-a cunning predator dragon's head. Its eyes are milk white, it has no
capable of traversing the Underdark, hunting Aber mouth, and its skin is studded with bright crystals
rations, and guarding its creator's lair. A gem stalker that pulse with psychic energy. These crystals give
is imbued with life, sapience, and purpose by the the gem stalker its telepathy, as well as its ability to
mystical energy of the gem dragon's breath, and it is fling crystal darts and create a protective link that
dedicated to its mission. can ward other creatures against harm.
GEM STALKER Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage.
Large Monstrosity, Typically Neutral
BONUS ACTIONS
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 67 (9dl0 + 18) Crystal Dart. Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 30 ft., one
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft. target. Hit: 7 (ldl0 + 2) force damage, and one of the following
effects occurs, determined by the kind of dragon that created
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA the gem stalker: ·
17 (+3) 15 (+2) 14 (+2) 15 (+2) 10 (+0) 6 (-2)
Amethyst. The gem stalker can teleport to an unoccupied
space it can see within 30 feet of it.
Saving Throws Dex +5, Int +5 Crystal. The gem stalker gains a number oftemporary hit
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +5 points equal to the damage dealt.
Damage Resistances psychic Emerald. The target must roll a d4 and subtract the number
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13 rolled from the next attack roll it makes before the start of
Languages understands Draconic but can't speak, the gem stalker's next turn.
telepathy 60 ft. Sapphire. The target must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3 throw or be pushed horizontally up to 10 feet away from the
gem stalker and be knocked prone.
Spider Climb. The gem stalker can climb difficult surfaces, in Topaz. The target must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution sav
cluding upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an ing throw or be poisoned until the start of the gem stalker's
ability check. next turn.
Unusual Nature. The gem stalker doesn't require food or drink.
REACTIONS
ACTIONS Protective Link. When another creature the gem stalker can
see within 30 feet of it is about to take damage, the gem stalker
Multiattack. The gem stalker makes four Claw attacks.
reduces that damage by 10 (3d6). The gem stalker then takes
damage equal to that amount.
202 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
=== PAGE 204 ===
I'll have- ~ov /o'lovv, fiz.bar1 the- 'fabvlovc;
ic; r1ot afyaid of gioc;tc;. I ar,\ ot'I the
e-or1mv~, de-e-pl~ c;adde-r1e-d b~ the- ve-ali~
of the-iv e-xic;te-r1e,,e,. Arid rY\a~be-jvc;t a
li-ltle- bit ue-e-pe-d ovt
-fiz.bar1
GHOST DRAGON
A dragon's attachment to a hoard can be strong
enough to bind the dragon's spirit to existence after •
•
death. Such a ghost dragon haunts the hoard, often
forming an attachment to a single priceless object
that becomes the focus of the ghost dragon's Un
dead existence.
A ghost dragon is a translucent and incorporeal
version of the original dragon. Though its breath
weapon resembles ghostly flames, lightning, or acid,
it carries an otherworldly curse. The breath's shad
owy mist can induce waking nightmares.
GHOST DRAGON Unusual Nature. The ghost dragon doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Huge Undead, Any Alignment
- . ACTIONS l·
\"
Armor Class 10 • .,... i.
S H p it e e P d o i 4 n 0 ts f t 3 ., 2 4 fl y ( 2 8 4 0 d f 1 t 2 . ( + h o 1 v 68 er ) ) ', / ; ' , .• · .~ . . • .. " . ' .»~ ,/'( #: , . ~ ~ ;, . .. . . . - C M la u w lt i a a t t t t a a c c k k s . . T he ghost dragon makes one Bite attack and two
.....
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack:+1 1 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
STR DEX CON INT Hit: 32 (6d8 + 5) cold damage, and the target's speed is halved
20 (+5) 10 (+0} 25 (+7) 16 (+3}
until the start of the dragon's next turn.
Saving Throws Con +13, Wis +8, Cha +10 Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Skills Perception +14, Stealth +12 Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) necrotic damage.
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing Terrifying Breath (Recharge 6). The ghost dragon exhales shad
Damage Immunities acid, cold, necrotic, poison
owy mist in a 90-foot cone. Each creature in that area must
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
make a DC 21 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained
creature takes 40 (9d8} cold damage and is frightened of the
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft.,
ghost dragon for 1 minute. On a successful save, the creature
passive Perception 24
takes half as much damage and isn't frightened.
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft.
While frightened of the ghost dragon, a creature is paralyzed.
Challenge 17 (18,000 XP} Proficiency Bonus +6
The frightened creature can repeat the saving throw at the end
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Incorporeal Movement. The ghost dragon can move through
If a creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends
other creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It
for it, the creature is immune to this ghost dragon's Terrifying
takes 5 (ldl0) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object.
Breath for the next 24 hours.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the ghost dragon fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 203
=== PAGE 205 ===
A horri /;>le- and vvonde-vfvl mth of ovY
vvovld i~ that anfhi~ ha~ the- pote-ntial
to /;>e, an e-ne-M~-C-onve-v~e-1~, an~i~ c...-an
/;>e- a fvie-nd!.
-fiz.ban
HOARD MIMIC
Kin to the common mimic described in the Monster
Manual, hoard mimics are among the oldest and
most cunning of their kind. A hoard mimic's mas
sive, amorphous form and shape-shifting prowess
allow it to take on the semblance of a vast trove of
treasures, not just a single object. Like smaller mim
ics, hoard mimics exude adhesive goo to trap prey.
They can also vent a fine, caustic mist from their
pores that burns and blinds creatures caught in it.
Hoard mimics are so named because many enter
into partnerships with dragons, each one serving
as a false hoard in a dragon's lair to draw unwitting
intruders away from the real riches-and into the
mimic's maw. If faced with unexpectedly fierce op
position, though, a hoard mimic might offer informa
tion about the true hoard in exchange for its life.
HOARD MIMIC ACTIONS
Huge Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Multiattack. The mimic makes one Bite attack and two
Pseudopod attacks.
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit Points 123 (13dl2 + 39)
Hit: 16 (2dl0 + 5) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) acid damage.
Speed 30 ft.
Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage, and the mimic
21 (+5) 12 (+l) 17 (+3) 10 (+0) 16 (+3) 10 (+0) adheres to the target. A creature adhered to the mimic is also
grappled by it (escape DC 16). Until this grapple ends, the
Saving Throws Con +6, Wis +6 target is restrained. Ability checks made to escape this grapple
Skills Persuasion +3, Stealth +6 have disadvantage.
Condition Immunities prone
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 Caustic Mist (Recharge 5-6). The mimic sprays a fine mist of
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 120 ft. acid in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3 a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature
takes 27 (6d8) acid damage and is blinded until the end of its
False Appearance (Hoard Form Only). If the mimic is motion next turn. On a successful save, the creature takes half as much
less at the start of combat, it has advantage on its initiative roll. damage and isn't blinded.
Moreover, if a creature hasn't observed the mimic move or act, Shapechanger. The mimic transforms into a hoard or back
that creature must succeed on a DC 18 Intelligence (Investiga into its true, amorphous form. Its statistics are the same in
tion) check to discern that the mimic is animate. each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn't trans
formed. It reverts to its true form if it dies.
204 CHAPTER 6 J BESTIARY
=== PAGE 206 ===
HOARD SCARABS
Hoard scarabs are beetle-like creatures that,
through some feat of natural adaptation or alchemi
cal ingenuity, blend in perfectly among piles of gold
coins. They feed on tiny mites that infest a dragon's
scales and lair, and their painful bite can be a strong
deterrent to would-be treasure thieves.
Hoard scarabs also produce a glittering metallic
dust from their wings that coats intruders who get
too close to them. The magic of this dust allows the
lair's draconic owner to sense intruders' location as
they move about the lair.
SWARM OF HOARD SCARABS
Medium Swarm of Tiny Monstrosities, Unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 31 (7d8)
Speed 20 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 20 ft.
STR DEX CON
6 (-2) 16 (+3) 11 (+0)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing
Tiny Monstrosity, Unaligned
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, grappled,
paralyzed, petrified, prone, restrained, stunned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft.,
Hit Points 7 (3d4)
passive Perception 9 ii
Speed 20 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 20 ft.
Languages-
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
4 (-3) 16 (+3) 11 (+O) 3 (-4) 8 (-1) 6 (-2)
False Appearance. If the swarm is motionless at the start of
combat, it has advantage on its initiative roll. Moreover, if a
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft.,
creature hasn't observed the swarm move or act, that creature
passive Perception 9
must succeed on a DC 18 Intelligence (Investigation) check to
Languages
discern that the swarm is animate.
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature's space and
False Appearance. If the scarab is motionless at the start of vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large
combat, it has advantage on its initiative roll. Moreover, if a enough for a Tiny scarab. The swarm can't regain hit points or
creature hasn't observed the scarab move or act, that creature gain temporary hit points.
must succeed on a DC 18 Intelligence (Investigation) check to
discern that the scarab is animate. ACTIONS
Swarm of Bites. Me lee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach Oft., one
ACTIONS creature in the swarm's space. Hit: 13 (3d6 + 3) piercing dam
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. age, or 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage if the swarm is at halfof its
Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, it hit points or fewer, and the target has disadvantage on attack
has disadvantage on attack rolls until the start of its next turn. rolls until the start of its next turn.
BONUS ACTIONS BONUS ACTIONS
Scale Dust (1/Day). The scarab releases magical glittering dust Scale Dust (1/Day). The swarm releases magical glittering dust
from its wings. Each creature within 5 feet of the scarab must from its wings. Each creature within 10 feet of the swarm must
succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw or be outlined in succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw or be outlined in
blue light for 10 minutes. While outlined in this way, a creature blue light for 10 minutes. While outlined in this way, a creature
sheds dim light in a 10-foot radius and can't benefit from being sheds dim light in a 10-foot radius and can't benefit from being
invisible. In addition, every Dragon within l mile of the creature invisible. In addition, every Dragon within l mile of the creature
becomes aware ofit and can unerringly track the creature. Cast becomes aware of it and can unerringly track the creature. Cast
ing dispel magic on the creature ends the effect on it. ing dispel magic on the creature ends the effect on it.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 20$
=== PAGE 207 ===
'·
HOLLOW DRAGON
Unlike dragons who explore the magic of undeath
for power, some metallic dragons see undeath as a
means to pursue a noble purpose. For the sake of
protecting an artifact or fulfilling an oath, a dragon
might transform into a hollow dragon, accepting un
death until that purpose is fulfilled.
As the name suggests, a hollow dragon is the husk
of a metallic dragon's hide, filled with radiant en
ergy. Depending on the dragon's original kind, that
energy might take the appearance of flames, light
ning, or misty vapors.
Hollow dragons don't suffer distractions from their
undying purpose. So powerful is their drive that
their bodies reconstitute if destroyed.
When they fulfill their purpose, most hollow
dragons embrace the death they have staved off for
so long. But others seek new tasks to sustain them
selves-or cling to undeath out of sheer stubborn
ness or habit.
HOLLOW DRAGON Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar
Huge Undead, Any Alignment get. Hit: 17 (2dl0 + 6) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8) radi
ant damage.
Armor Class 19 (natural armor) Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit Points 241 (2ldl2 + 105) Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft.
Sapping Presence. Each creature of the hollow dragon's choice
within 60 feet of it must make a DC 19 Wisdom saving throw.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
On a failed save, the creature's speed is halved and it has dis
23 (+6) 12 (+l) 21 (+5) 16 (+3) 13 (+l) 21 (+5)
advantage on attack rolls until the end of its next turn. On a
r~ ·:~•; successful save, the creature is immune to this hollow dragon's
Saving Throws Con +11, lnt+9, Wis +7, Cha +11 ~: "·~ ,;;_.::-,
Skills Arcana +9, History +15, Perception +13 ·•.' ~ Sapping Presence for 24 hours.
Damage Resistances necrotic •, ' .... \~, ~~ Radiant Breath (Recharge 5-6). The hollow dragon exhales
Damage Immunities poison, radiant ,, )ill . , radiant flames in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area \
Condition Immunities charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 3:. l · must make a DC 19 Dexterity saving throw, taking 54 (12d8)
frightened, paralyzed, poisoned radiant damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 23
successful one.
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 18 (20,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +6 LEGENDARY ACTIONS
The hollow dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the hollow dragon fails a sav
the options below. Only one legendary action can be used at a
ing throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The hollow
Reconstruction. When the hollow dragon is reduced to O hit dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
points, its body breaks into nine pieces: two arms, two legs,
Claw. The hollow dragon makes one Claw attack.
two wings, a tail, a torso, and a head. Each piece is a Large
Ghostly Binding (Costs 2 Actions). The hollow dragon creates
object with AC 19, 27 hit points, and immunity to psychic and
ethereal bindings around a creature it can see within 60 feet
poison damage. After ld6 days, if all pieces are still within 6
ofit. The target must succeed on a DC 19 Strength saving
miles of each other, they all teleport to the location of the head
throw or be restrained until the end of the dragon's next turn.
piece and merge with it, whereupon the hollow dragon regains
Booming Scales (Costs 3 Actions). A sudden loud ringing noise,
all its hit points and becomes active again. painfully intense, erupts from the hollow dragon's frame.
Each creature within 10 feet of the hollow dragon must make
ACTIONS
a DC 19 Constitution saving throw, taking 24 (7d6) thunder
Multiattack. The hollow dragon makes one Bite attack and two damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a suc
Claw attacks, and it can use Sapping Presence. cessful one.
206 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
I
=== PAGE 208 ===
•
•
..
,, .
LION DR AKE .,,
-~~
Large Monstrosity, Typically Neutral
,;
Armor Class 16 (natural armor) ,,i ~ .;,,; ..
Hit Points 119 (14dl0 + 42)
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft.
,'.J'
STR DEX CON INT WIS
19 (+4) 15 (+2) 17 (+3) 6 (-2) 12 (+l)
Skills Perception +7
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages Draconic
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
ACTIONS
Multiattack. The liondrake makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2dl0 + 4) piercing damage. If the target is a Medium or
smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving
LIONDRAKE
throw or be knocked prone.
A liondrake is a solitary and territorial predator with Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
the long neck and wings of a brass dragon and the Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
head and body of a lion (including a luxurious mane
Blood-Chilling Roar (Recharge 4-6). The liondrake lets out a
on males). Sometimes known as dragonnes, lion
terrifying roar audible out to 300 feet. Any creature within 30
drakes rely on their ferocity and their frightful roar feet of the liondrake that can hear its roar must succeed on a
to overcome prey and drive off rivals. DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened of the liondrake
Liondrakes are voracious hunters that range for l minute. A creature that fails the save by 5 or more is
across well-established territories. They don't typi also paralyzed for the same duration. A creature can repeat
the saving throw at the end of its turns, ending the effect on
cally seek out people as prey, but those folk who en
itself on a success. If a target's saving throw is successful or
croach into liondrake territory are fair game-which
the effect ends for it, the target is immune to this liondrake's
feeds the creature's reputation as hungering for
Blood-Chilling Roar for the next 24 hours.
Humanoid flesh.
CHAPTER 6 j BESTIARY 207
=== PAGE 209 ===
METALLIC GREATWYRM
Some of the oldest and wisest metallic dragons
undergo a miraculous metamorphosis to become
greatwyrms. This transformation is often wrought
by Bahamut, who takes pride in elevating his wor
thiest children to a status approaching his own
greatness.
A metallic greatwyrm's transformation often
involves fusing the consciousness, the magic, and
sometimes even the physical forms of multiple
echoes of the same dragon across the worlds of the
JUSTICE AND MERCY
Material Plane. Several of the dragons identified as
Lendys and Tamara are both silver greatwyrms, but
dragon gods-including Aasterinian (described in
they could not be more different from each other.
the "Brass Dragons" section of chapter 5), Lendys,
Lendys is renowned as an impartial judge who is
and Tamara-are metallic greatwyrms who have equally ready to serve as jury and executioner when
combined the essences of multiple forms to achieve dragons commit grave injustices against dragonkind.
this godlike status. He is lawful neutral, and he is said to be incapable of
Metallic greatwyrms are among the largest crea mercy or forgiveness.
Tamara, by contrast, embodies the ideal of mercy.
tures in the multiverse, overshadowing most other
She heals the sick, tends the injured, and delivers a
dragons. Mighty elemental forces swirl around them
peaceful departure to dragons nearing the end of their
in response to their wishes, and their breath weap
natural lives. She has a particular loathing for dracoli
ons can sap the strength from armies-or lay waste ches and other draconic Undead.
to whole regions.
208 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
l ........
I
=== PAGE 210 ===
C-all bia~ed, bvt fhe- 11g-e-af' part
Me-
of <<Me-tallic--g-e-afw~vM>' fee-I~ a li-ttle
vedvndant It fl~ vvifhovt ~a~i~
-Azban
-
· METALLIC GREATWYRM creature, it must succeed on a DC 26 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone.
· Gargantuan Dragon (Metallic), Typically Lawful Good
Breath Weapon (Recharges 5-6). The greatwyrm uses one of
Armor Class 22 (natural armor) the following breath weapons:
Hit Points 565 (29d20 + 261)
Elemental Breath. The greatwyrm exhales elemental energy in a
Speed 60 ft., burrow 60 ft., fly 120 ft., swim 60 ft.
300-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 25
Dexterity saving throw, taking 84 (13dl2) damage of a type
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
determined by the greatwyrm's kind-acid (copper), cold
30 (+10) 16 (+3) 29 (+9) 21 (+5) 22 (+6) 30 (+10)
(silver), fire (brass or gold), or lightning (bronze)-on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Saving Throws Dex +11, Con +17, Int +13, Cha +18
Sapping Breath. The greatwyrm exhales gas in a 300-foot cone.
.. Skills Insight +14, Perception +22, Persuasion +18 Each creature in that area must make a DC 25 Constitution
Damage Immunities acid (copper), cold (silver), fire (brass and saving throw. On a failed save, the creature falls unconscious
gold), or lightning (bronze) for l minute. On a successful save, the creature has disad
• Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned vantage on attack rolls and saving throws until the end of the
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 32 greatwyrm's next turn. An unconscious creature can repeat
• Languages Common, Draconic the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the
Challenge 28 (120,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +8
effect on itself on a success .
Legendary Resistance (4/Day). If the greatwyrm fails a saving Change Shape. The greatwyrm magically transforms into any
creature that is Medium or Small, while retaining its game
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
statistics (other than its size). This transformation ends if the
Metallic Awakening (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If dragon is reduced to O hit points or uses its action to end it.
the greatwyrm would be reduced to O hit points, its current
hit point total instead resets to 450 hit points, it recharges its LEGENDARY ACTIONS
Breath Weapon, and it regains any expended uses of Legendary
The greatwyrm can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
Resistance. Additionally, the greatwyrm can now use the op
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be
tions in the "Mythic Actions" section for l hour. Award a party
used at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn.
an additional 120,000 XP (240,000 XP total) for defeating the
The greatwyrm regains spent legendary actions at the start
greatwyrm after its Metallic Awakening activates.
of its turn.
Unusual Nature. The greatwyrm doesn't require food or drink.
Attack. The greatwyrm makes one Claw or Tail attack.
Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The greatwyrm beats its wings.
ACTIONS
Each creature within 30 feet ofit must succeed on a DC 26
Multiattack. The greatwyrm makes one Bite attack and two Dexterity saving throw or take 17 (2d6 + 10) bludgeoning
Claw attacks. damage and be knocked prone. The greatwyrm can then fly
up to half its flying speed.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack:+1 8 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar
get. Hit: 21 (2dl0 + 10) piercing damage plus 13 (2dl2)
MYTHIC ACTIONS
force damage.
If the greatwyrm's Metallic Awakening trait has activated in the
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +18 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
last hour, it can use the options below as legendary actions.
Hit: 19 (2d8 + 10) slashing damage. If the target is a Huge
Bite. The greatwyrm makes one Bite attack.
or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 20) and is re
Shattering Roar (Costs 2 Actions). The greatwyrm unleashes
strained until this grapple ends. The greatwyrm can have only
a magical roar. Each creature in a 120-foot-radius sphere
one creature grappled in this way at a time.
centered on the greatwyrm must succeed on a DC 26 Consti
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +18 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. tution saving throw or take 19 (3dl2) thunder damage and be
Hit: 21 (2dl0 + 10) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a incapacitated until the end of its next turn.
CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY 209
=== PAGE 211 ===
\
METALLIC SENTINELS
A metallic sentinel is a guardian created by a metal
lic dragon, forged from the metal associated with its
creator and powered by the energy of the dragon's
breath. An artificial being sculpted in elegant fili
gree, it is dedicated to defusing tensions that could
spiral into violence.
•
METALLIC PEACEKEEPER
When a metallic dragon grows attached to a settle- ..,
ment of smaller folk-often after dwelling there for
a time in Humanoid form-the dragon might decide
to create a metallic peacekeeper to protect the place.
The peacekeeper can ward a community for centu-
ries, standing in the place of its dragon creator and
maintaining peace and order.
METALLIC WARBLER
Metallic warblers resemble songbirds and serve
as clandestine agents of their creators, keeping
watch over communities without directly interven
ing. Their telepathic bond lets them summon their
dragon creators in case of dire need.
METALLIC PEACEKEEPER
Medium Construct, Typically Neutral Good
METALLIC WARBLER
Tiny Construct, Typically Neutral Good
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 68 (8d8 + 32)
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Speed 30 ft.
Hit Points 14 (4d4 + 4)
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 10 (+O) 18 (+4) 14 (+2) 12 (+l) 11 (+O)
STR DEX CON
4 (-3) 15 (+2) 12 (+1)
Damage Immunities fire
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
Saving Throws Dex +4
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
Damage Immunities fire
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 ~
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
Languages Common, Draconic, telepathy 30 ft.
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands Common and Draconic but can't speak
Immutable Form. The peacekeeper is immune to any spell or
Challenge 1/4 (SO XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
effect that would alter its form.
Telepathic Bond. While the peacekeeper is on the same plane of Immutable Form. The warbler is immune to any spell or effect
existence as its master, it can magically convey what it senses that would alter its form.
to its master, and the two can communicate telepathically with
Telepathic Bond. While the warbler is on the same plane of
each other.
existence as its master, it can magically convey what it senses
to its master, and the two can communicate telepathically with
ACTIONS
each other.
Multiattack. The peacekeeper makes two Slam attacks.
ACTIONS
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +S to hit, reach S ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (3d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage. Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach S ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) slashing damage.
Calming Mist (Recharge 5-6). The peacekeeper releases a
calming gas in a 30-foot-radius sphere centered on itself. Each Calming Mist (Recharge 5-6). The warbler releases a calming
creature in that area must succeed on a DC 14 Charisma saving gas in a 5-foot-radius sphere centered on itself. Each creature
throw or become charmed by the peacekeeper for l minute. in that area must succeed on a DC 11 Charisma saving throw or
While charmed in this way, the creature is incapacitated and become charmed by the warbler for l minute. While charmed
has a speed of 0. in this way, the creature is incapacitated and has a speed ofO.
210 CHAPTER 6 I BESTIARY
l .........
I
=== PAGE 212 ===
MOONSTONE DRAGONS
Ancient legends suggest that when the gods came
to the First World and tried to populate it with their and spur adventurers to heroic deeds. They some
Humanoid followers, a clever dragon fled to the times give guidance to those in need or request help
Feywild to hide a clutch of eggs. The magic of that from adventurers to encourage them to greatness.
faerie realm suffused the eggs, which hatched into As a rule, moonstone dragons are not particularly
the first moonstone dragons. Their descendants are interested in gold or copper, but they love silver,
now found throughout the Feywild. platinum, and mithral. They also cherish treasures
Moonstone dragons are graceful and elegant whose value can't be easily quantified-a song sung
creatures with opalescent scales and ruffs of from the heart, a lock of a loved one's hair, or a
emerald-green fur running down their chins, chests, painting of a favorite place. A story of happy times
backs, and tails. One horn arcs from the back of a fondly remembered is more precious to a moonstone
moonstone dragon's skull and another at the tip of dragon than a sack of gold.
the nose; the two horns together form a shape that's
A MOONSTONE DRAGON'S LAIR
reminiscent of a slender crescent moon. Moonstone
dragons are playful and impetuous forces of mis For their lairs, moonstone dragons look for places
chief in their early years, but the best of them ma kissed by the moon; lonely peaks, forest clearings,
ture into wise teachers and storytellers who anchor and placid lakes are among their favorite sites.
Feywild communities. The worst of them are pomp Their whimsical nature makes them more likely
ous and ill behaved, but even those remain gentle than other dragons to establish multiple lairs even
by nature and curious about all things-especially at a young age. They link their scattered sites with
travelers from faraway places. magic portals, often splitting their time between the
Moonstone dragons can project themselves into Feywild, the Material Plane, and the Ethereal Plane.
the realm of dreams to communicate with the crea The challenge rating of a legendary moonstone
tures that sleep near their lairs. In this way, they dragon increases by 1 when it's encountered
inspire artists and poets, encourage great thinkers, in its lair.
ANCIENT MOONSTONE DRAGON Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (ld8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a crea
Gargantuan Dragon, Typically Neutral
ture, it must succeed on a DC 21 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 330 (20d20 + 120) Breath Weapon (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft. following breath weapons:
Dream Breath. The dragon exhales mist in a 90-foot cone. Each
22 S T (+ R 6 ) 18 D E (+ X 4 ) 2 C 3 O (+ N 6 ) 20 IN (+ T 5 ) 22 W ( I + S 6 ) 2 C 6 H (+ A 8 ) . ., . creature in that area must succeed on a DC 21 Constitution
saving throw or fall unconscious for 10 minutes. This effect
ends for a creature if the creature takes damage or someone
Saving Throws Int +12, Wis +13, Cha +15
uses an action to wake it.
Skills Perception + 13, Persuasion + 15, Stealth +1 1 ••,,..ti a•., Moonlight Breath. The dragon exhales a beam of moonlight in
Condition Immunities charmed ~} ' a 120-foot line that is 10 feet wide. Each creature in that area
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 23
must make a DC 21 Dexterity saving throw, taking 60 (lldl0)
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
radiant damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
Challenge 21 (33,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
a successful one.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving Spellcasting. The dragon casts one of the following spells,
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 23):
ACTIONS At will: faerie fire
Multiattack. The dragon makes one Bite attack and two 2/day each: calm emotions, dispel magic, invisibility, revivify
Claw attacks.
LEGENDARY ACTIONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar
The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
get. Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage plus 11 (2dl0) radi
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
ant damage.
at one time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The
