Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
20 (+5) 15 (+2) 18 (+4) 13 (+1) 11 (+0) 11 (+0)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +5
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Abyssal, Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Fey Ancestry. The draegloth has advantage on saving throws
against being charmed, and magic can’t put it to sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The draegloth makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 16 (2dl0 + 5) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (2dl0 + 5) slashing damage.
Spellcasting. The draegloth casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 11):
At will: dancing lights, darkness
1/day each: confusion, faerie fire

=== PAGE 99 ===
Drow Arachnomancer
Drow spellcasters who seek to devote themselves
wholly to Lolth, the Spider Queen, sometimes walk
the sinister path of the arachnomancer. By offering
up body and soul to Lolth, they gain tremendous
power and a supernatural connection to the ancient
spiders of the Demonweb Pits, channeling magic
from that dread place.
Drow Arachnomanger
Medium Humanoid (Elf), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 15 (studded leather)
Hit Points 162 (25d8 + 50)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
11 (+0) 17 (+3) 14 (+2) 19 (+4) 14 (+2) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Con +7, I nt +9, Cha +8
Skills Arcana +9, Nature +9, Perception +7, Stealth +8
Damage Resistances poison
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages Elvish, Undercommon, can speak with spiders
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against
being charmed, and magic can’t put the drow to sleep.
Spider Climb. The drow can climb difficult surfaces, includ­
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has disadvan­
tage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) checks
that rely on sight.
Web Walker. The drow ignores movement restrictions caused
by webbing.
Actions
Multiattack. The drow makes three attacks, using Bite, Poison­
ous Touch, Web, or a combination of them. One attack can be
replaced by a use of Spellcasting.
Bite (Spider Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach
5 ft., one target. Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) piercing damage, and the
--col--
target must make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw, taking 31
(7d8) poison damage on a failed save, or half as much damage
on a successful one. If the poison damage reduces the target
to 0 hit points, the target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour,
even after regaining hit points, and is paralyzed while poisoned
in this way.
Poisonous Touch (Humanoid Form Only). Melee Weapon
Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 35 (1 Od6) poi­
son damage.
Web (Spider Form Only; Recharge 5-6). Ranged Weapon At­
tack: +8 to hit, range 30/60 ft., one target. Hit: The target is
restrained by webbing. As an action, the restrained target can
make a DC 15 Strength check, bursting the webbing on a suc­
cess. The webbing can also be attacked and destroyed (AC 10;
hp 5; vulnerability to fire damage; immunity to bludgeoning,
poison, and psychic damage).
Spellcasting. The drow casts one of the following spells, re­
quiring no material components and using Intelligence as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 17):
At will: dancing lights, mage hand
1/day each: darkness, dispel magic, etherealness, faerie fire, fly,
insect plague, invisibility
Bonus Actions
Change Shape (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The drow
magically transforms into a Large spider, remaining in that
form for up to 1 hour, or back into its true form. Its statistics,
other than its size, are the same in each form. It can speak and
cast spells while in spider form. Any equipment it is wearing or
carrying in Humanoid form melds into the spider form. It can’t
activate, use, wield, or otherwise benefit from any of its equip­
ment. It reverts to its Humanoid form if it dies.
c
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY

=== PAGE 100 ===
Drow Favored Consort
Medium Humanoid (Elf, Wizard), Any Alignment
Armor Class 15 (18 with mage armor)
Hit Points 240 (32d8 + 96)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 20 (+5) 16 (+3) 18 (+4) 15 (+2) 18 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +11, Con +9, Cha +10
Skills Acrobatics +11, Athletics +8, Perception +8, Stealth +11
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 18 (20,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +6
Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against
being charmed, and magic can’t put the drow to sleep.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has disadvan­
tage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) checks
that rely on sight.
IOO CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Drow Favored Consort
Nearly every priestess of Lolth, including the pow­
erful drow matron mother in this book, takes an at­
tractive drow as consort. Chosen as much for beauty
as for magical might, a drow favored consort can
hold their own in both conversation and combat.
Combining the roles of advisor, protector, and be­
loved, some favored consorts are content with a sup­
porting role, while more ambitious consorts aspire
to be the power behind the throne—or even to claim
the throne themselves.
Those favored consorts who prove their cunning
gain the ear, and perhaps even the heart, of their
priestess and are relied on to provide useful advice.
No position of consort is assured for long, though;
Lolth’s priestesses are notoriously fickle, and a con­
sort must often contend with rivals.
Some favored consorts work behind the scenes
to undermine the evils encouraged by Lolth. Oth­
ers can be found in Underdark cities free of Lolth’s
influence, where these powerful spellcasters apply
their might toward ending her tyranny.
Actions
Multiattack. The drow makes three Scimitar or Arcane Erup­
tion attacks. The drow can replace one of the attacks with a use
of Spellcasting.
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 8 (ld6 + 5) slashing damage plus 27 (6d8) poi­
son damage.
Arcane Eruption. Ranged Spell Attack: +10 to hit, range 120 ft.,
one target. Hit: 36 (8d8) force damage, and the drow can push
the target up to 10 feet away if it is a Large or smaller creature.
Spellcasting. The drow casts one of the following spells, re­
quiring no material components and using Intelligence as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 18):
At will: dancing lights, mage armor, mage hand, message
3/day each: dimension door, fireball, invisibility
1/day each: darkness, faerie fire, levitate (self only)
Reactions
Protective Shield (3/Day). When the drow or a creature within
10 feet of it is hit by an attack roll, the drow gives the target a
+5 bonus to its AC until the start of the drow’s next turn, which
can cause the triggering attack roll to miss.

=== PAGE 101 ===
! ' .... ------------------------------------ - ■=
Drow House Captain
Medium Humanoid (Elf), Any Alignment
Armor Class 16 (chain mail)
Hit Points 162 (25d8 + 50)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 19 (+4) 15 (+2) 12 (+1) 14 (+2) 13 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +6, Wis +6
Skills Perception +6, Stealth +8
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against
being charmed, and magic can’t put the drow to sleep.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has disadvan­
tage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) checks
that rely on sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The drow makes two Scimitar attacks and one
Whip or Hand Crossbow attack.
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (1 d6 + 4) slashing damage plus 14 (4d6) poi­
son damage.
Whip. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (1 d4 + 4) slashing damage.
Hand Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, range 30/120
ft., one target. Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) piercing damage, and the target
must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be poi­
soned for 1 hour. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the tar­
get is also unconscious while poisoned in this way. The target
regains consciousness if it takes damage or if another creature
takes an action to shake it.
Spellcasting. The drow casts one of the following spells, requir­
ing no material components and using Charisma as the spell­
casting ability (spell save DC 13):
At will: dancing lights
1/day each: darkness, faerie fire, levitate (self only)
Bonus Actions
Battle Command. Choose one creature within 30 feet of the
drow that the drow can see. If the chosen creature can see or
hear the drow, that creature can use its reaction to make one
melee attack or to take the Dodge or Hide action.
Reactions
Parry. The drow adds 3 to its AC against one melee attack roll
that would hit it. To do so, the drow must see the attacker and
be wielding a melee weapon.
--col--
House eaptAiul will b Prot“t .
Umilu—whether W their birth how or the.r
Ltoon of urupprj rebels. « to Amjthiw,
(Sowretoes i«furi«M mother for m, choSeu
Umilu, W I Mrvrire their AeWion.
1 7 TASHA
Drow House Captain
A drow house captain leads the troops of an Un­
derdark faction, whether defending a stronghold or
leading forces against enemies. These officers make
extensive study of strategy and tactics to become
effective leaders in battle.
Among Lolth’s devotees in the city of Menzober-
ranzan in the Forgotten Realms, each noble house
entrusts the leadership of its military forces to a
house captain, who is typically the first or second
son of a drow matron mother (appears in this book).
Elsewhere drow house captains fight in the war
against Lolth, often allying with duergar and others
who also wish to rid their subterranean world of
that god’s malevolence.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY IOI

=== PAGE 102 ===
Drow Inquisitor
Lolth’s worshipers expect treachery—the Spider
Queen encourages it, after all. A certain amount o
backstabbing and double-crossing can be manage
but too much can undermine an entire community
To keep some semblance of order and to root out
traitors, priestesses of Lolth employ inquisitors.
Inquisitors are chosen from the ranks of the pries
hood, and their authority is equaled only by that o
the drow matron mothers (also in this book) of the
noble houses. Anyone they decide is at odds with
hierarchy faces painful interrogation and usually a
excruciating death.
VARIANT: DEMON SUMMONING
Some drow inquisitors have an action that allows
them to summon a yochlol.
Summon Demon (1/Day). The drow attempts to magically
summon a yochlol (see the Monster Manual), with a 50 perc
chance of success. If the attempt fails, the drow takes 5 (IdlO
psychic damage. Otherwise, the summoned demon appears
an unoccupied space within 60 feet of its summoner, acts as
an ally of its summoner, and can’t summon other demons. I
remains for 10 minutes, until it or its summoner dies, or unt
its summoner dismisses it as an action.
102 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Drow Inquisitor
Medium Humanoid (Cleric, Elf), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 16 (breastplate)
Hit Points 149 (23d8 + 46)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
11 (+1) 15 (+2) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 21 (+5) 20 (+5)
Saving Throws Con +7, Wis +10, Cha +10
Skills Insight +10, Perception +10, Religion +8, Stealth +7
Condition Immunities frightened
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 20
Languages Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Discern Lie. The drow discerns when a creature in earshot
speaks a lie in a language the drow knows.
Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against
being charmed, and magic can’t put the drow to sleep.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has disadvan­
tage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) checks
that rely on sight.
Actions
of
Multiattack. The drow makes three Death Lance attacks.
ed,
Death Lance. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
y.
target. Hit: 8 (1 d6 + 5) piercing damage plus 18 (4d8) necrotic
damage. The target’s hit point maximum is reduced by an
amount equal to the necrotic damage taken. This reduction
st­ lasts until the target finishes a long rest. The target dies if its
of hit point maximum is reduced to 0.
e
Spellcasting. The drow’s casts one of the following spells,
the requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
an spellcasting ability (spell save DC 18):
At will: dancing lights, detect magic, message, thaumaturgy
1/day each: clairvoyance, darkness, detect thoughts, dispel magic,
faerie fire, levitate (self only), silence, suggestion, true seeing
Bonus Actions
Spectral Dagger (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The
drow conjures a floating, spectral dagger within 60 feet of itself.
cent The drow can make a melee spell attack (+10 to hit) against one
O) creature within 5 feet of the dagger. On a hit, the target takes 9
s in (1 d8 + 5) force damage.
s The dagger lasts for 1 minute. As a bonus action on later
It turns, the drow can move the dagger up to 20 feet and repeat
til the attack against one creature within 5 feet of the dagger.

=== PAGE 103 ===
Drow Matron Mother
Among drow followers of Lolth, each noble house
is led by a matron mother, an influential priestess
of Lolth charged with carrying out the god’s will
while also advancing the interests of the family. Ma­
tron mothers embody the scheming and treachery
associated with the Queen of Spiders. Each stands
at the center of a vast conspiratorial web, with de­
mons, spiders, and conscripted soldiers positioned
between them and their enemies. Although matron
mothers command great power, that power depends
on maintaining the Spider Queen’s favor, and the
goddess sometimes capriciously takes back what
she has given. The stat block here represents a ma­
tron mother at the height of her power.
A matron mother is almost never encountered
alone. She is typically accompanied by a drow
favored consort and a drow house captain, each
of whom appears in this book. Other Underdark
creatures might also be in the priestess’s presence,
providing protection or advice.
Mothers of Rebellion
Some matron mothers renounce Lolth and join the
war against their former goddess. Such drow could
be of any alignment, and they lose the following abil­
ities in the stat block: Lolth’s Fickle Favor, Summon
Servant, and Compel Demon. Even without these
abilities, drow matron mothers are formidable op­
ponents, and several of them hold positions of great
influence in the Underdark armies arrayed against
the followers of Lolth.
A Matron Mother’s Lair
The palace of a drow matron mother is her home
and fortress. Sigils throughout the building allow
the matron mother to use the following lair actions
while within it.
Any temple of Lolth also functions as a matron
mother’s lair while she is inside it, unless she has
renounced Lolth or another matron mother is
present. When two or more matron mothers gather
within a temple of their goddess, none of them can
use it as their lair.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the
drow can take one of the following lair actions when
in her lair; she can’t take the same lair action two
rounds in a row:
Perceive Interlopers. The drow projects her mind
throughout her lair, marking any potential threats
against her or her retinue. Until initiative count 20
--col--
of the next round, hostile creatures within the lair
can’t become hidden from her and gain no benefit
from the invisible condition against her.
Spectral Web. A glistening spectral spider web
erupts from a point the drow can see within 120
feet of her. Each creature within 60 feet of that
point must succeed a DC 19 Dexterity saving
throw or be restrained for 1 minute. A creature
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of
its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Telekinetic Throw. The drow targets one creature
she can see within 60 feet of her and attempts
to expel it from her presence. The target must
succeed on a DC 19 Strength saving throw or be
flung 2d6 x 10 feet through the air. A creature
smashed into a solid object takes ld6 bludgeon­
ing damage for every 10 feet moved. If released
in midair, the creature takes falling damage
as normal.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY IOg

=== PAGE 104 ===
Armor Class 17 (half plate)
Hit Points 247 (33d8 + 99)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
12 (+1) 18 (+4) 16 (+3) 17 (+3) 21 (+5) 22 (+6)
Saving Throws Con +9, Wis +11, Cha +12
Skills Insight +11, Perception +11, Religion +9, Stealth +10
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 21
Languages Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 20 (25,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +6
Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against
being charmed, and magic can’t put the drow to sleep.
Special Equipment. The drow wields a tentacle rod.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has disadvan­
tage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) checks
that rely on sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The drow makes two Demon Staff attacks or one
Demon Staff attack and three Tentacle Rod attacks.
Demon Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (1 d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage, or 8 (1 d8 + 4)
bludgeoning damage if used with two hands, plus 14 (4d6)
psychic damage. The target must succeed on a DC 19 Wisdom
saving throw or become frightened of the drow for 1 minute.
The frightened target can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Tentacle Rod. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
creature. Hit: 3 (1 d6) bludgeoning damage. If the target is hit
three times by the rod on one turn, the target must succeed
on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or suffer the following
effects for 1 minute: the target’s speed is halved, it has disad­
vantage on Dexterity saving throws, and it can’t use reactions.
Moreover, on each of its turns, it can take either an action or
104 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Divine Flame (2/Day). A 10-foot-radius, 40-foot-high column
of divine fire sprouts in an area up to 120 feet away from the
drow. Each creature in the column must make a DC 20 Dex­
terity saving throw, taking 14 (4d6) fire damage and 14 (4d6)
radiant damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
Spellcasting. The drow casts one of the following spells, requir­
ing no material components and using Charisma as the spell­
casting ability (spell save DC 20):
At will: command, dancing lights, detect magic, thaumaturgy
2/day each: banishment, blade barrier, cure wounds, hold person,
plane shift, silence
1/day each: clairvoyance, darkness, detect thoughts, dispel magic,
faerie fire, gate, levitate (self only), suggestion
Bonus Actions
Lolth’s Fickle Favor. The drow bestows the Spider Queen’s
blessing on one ally she can see within 30 feet of her. The ally
takes 7 (2d6) psychic damage but has advantage on the next
attack roll it makes before the end of its next turn.
Summon Servant (1/Day). The drow magically summons a
glabrezu or a yochlol (both appear the Monster Manual). The
summoned creature appears in an unoccupied space within
60 feet of its summoner, acts as an ally of its summoner, and
can’t summon other demons. It remains for 10 minutes, until
it or its summoner dies, or until its summoner dismisses it as
an action.
Legendary Actions
The drow can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op­
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at
a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The drow
regains spent legendary actions at the start of her turn.
Compel Demon. An allied demon within 30 feet of the drow
uses its reaction to make one attack against a target of the
draw’s choice that she can see.
Demon Staff. The drow makes one Demon Staff attack.
Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). The drow uses Spellcasting.

=== PAGE 105 ===
Drow Shadowblade
Medium Humanoid (Elf), Any Alignment
Armor Class 17 (studded leather)
Hit Points 150 (20d8 + 60)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 21 (+5) 16 (+3) 12 (+1) 14 (+2) 13 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +9, Con +7, Wis +6
Skills Perception +6, Stealth +9
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Elvish, Undercommon
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) Proficiency Bonus+4
Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the drow's
darkvision.
Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against
being charmed, and magic can’t put the drow to sleep.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has disadvan­
tage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) checks
that rely on sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The drow makes three Shadow Sword attacks.
One of the attacks can be replaced by a Hand Crossbow attack.
The drow can also use Spellcasting to cast darkness.
Shadow Sword. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit,
reach 5 ft. or range 30/60 ft., one target. Hit: 27 (7d6 + 5) ne­
crotic damage.
Hand Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 30/120
ft., one target. Hit: 8 (ld6 + 5) piercing damage, and the target
must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be poi­
soned for 1 hour. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the tar­
get is also unconscious while poisoned in this way. The target
regains consciousness if it takes damage or if another creature
takes an action to shake it.
Spellcasting. The drow casts one of the following spells, requir­
ing no material components and using Charisma as the spell­
casting ability (spell save DC 13):
At will: dancing lights, darkness
1/day each: faerie fire, levitate (self only)
Bonus Actions
Shadow Step. While in dim light or darkness, the drow tele­
ports, along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up
to 60 feet to an unoccupied space it can see that is also in dim
light or darkness. It then has advantage on the first melee at­
