Created by the Cat Lord—a divine being of the Up­
per Planes—to blend the qualities of humanoids
and cats, tabaxi are a varied people in both attitude
and appearance. In some lands, tabaxi live like the
cats they resemble, naturally curious and at home in
playful environments. In other places, tabaxi live as
other folk do, not exhibiting the feline behavior the
Cat Lord intended.
Tabaxi’s appearance is as varied as their attitudes.
Some tabaxi have features or patterning in their fur
like tigers, jaguars, or other big cats, while others
have appearances more like a house cat. Still others
have unique patterns or might style their fur to their
preferences—or might even be hairless!
Tabaxi Traits
As a tabaxi, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium or Small. You choose the
size when you select this race.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet, and you
have a climbing speed equal to your walking speed.
Cat's Claws. You can use your claws to make un­
armed strikes. When you hit with them, the strike
deals ld6 + your Strength modifier slashing dam­
age, instead of the bludgeoning damage normal for
an unarmed strike.
Cat's Talent. You have proficiency in the Percep­
tion and Stealth skills.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Feline Agility. Your reflexes and agility allow you
to move with a burst of speed. When you move on
your turn in combat, you can double your speed
until the end of the turn. Once you use this trait,
you can’t use it again until you move 0 feet on one of
your turns.
CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES 33

=== PAGE 34 ===
Tortles have a saying: “We wear our homes on our
backs.” These turtle folk live on many worlds, most
often journeying up and down coasts, along water­
ways, and across the sea. Tortles don’t have a uni­
fied story of how they were created, but they all have
a sense of being mystically connected to the natural
world. Carrying their shelter on their backs gives
tortles a special feeling of security wherever they
go, for even if they visit a far, unknown country, they
have a place to lay their heads.
Tortles exhibit the same range of coloration and
patterns found among turtles, and many tortles en­
joy adorning their shells in distinctive ways.
Tortle Traits
As a tortle, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium or Small. You choose the
size when you select this race.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Claws. You have claws that you can use to make
unarmed strikes. When you hit with them, the strike
deals ld6 + your Strength modifier slashing dam­
age, instead of the bludgeoning damage normal for
an unarmed strike.
34 CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
Hold Breath. You can hold your breath for up
to 1 hour.
Natural Armor. Your shell provides you a base
AC of 17 (your Dexterity modifier doesn’t affect this
number). You can’t wear light, medium, or heavy ar­
mor, but if you are using a shield, you can apply the
shield’s bonus as normal.
Nature's Intuition. Thanks to your mystical con­
nection to nature, you gain proficiency with one of
the following skills of your choice: Animal Handling,
Medicine, Nature, Perception, Stealth, or Survival.
Shell Defense. You can withdraw into your shell
as an action. Until you emerge, you gain a +4 bonus
to your AC, and you have advantage on Strength
and Constitution saving throws. While in your shell,
you are prone, your speed is 0 and can’t increase,
you have disadvantage on Dexterity saving throws,
you can’t take reactions, and the only action you can
take is a bonus action to emerge from your shell.

=== PAGE 35 ===
Triton
Originally from the Elemental Plane of Water, many
tritons entered the Material Plane centuries ago in
response to the growing threat of evil elementals.
Those tritons spread across the worlds’ oceans,
protecting the surface from terrors in the deep. Over
time, triton have extended their stewardship over
the sea floor to the ocean’s surface.
Tritons have webbed hands and feet, small fins
on their calves, and coloration that favors blues
and greens.
Triton Traits
As a triton, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet, and
you have a swimming speed equal to your
walking speed.
Amphibious. You can breathe air and water.
Control Air and Water. You can cast fog cloud
with this trait. Starting at 3rd level, you can cast
the gust of wind spell with this trait. Starting at 5th
level, you can also cast the water walk spell with it.
Once you cast any of these spells with this trait, you
can’t cast that spell with it again until you finish a
long rest. You can also cast these spells using any
spell slots you have of the appropriate level.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for these spells when you cast them
with this trait (choose when you select this race).
--col--
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Emissary of the Sea. You can communicate sim­
ple ideas to any Beast, Elemental, or Monstrosity
that has a swimming speed. It can understand your
words, though you have no special ability to under­
stand it in return.
Guardian of the Depths. Adapted to the frigid
ocean depths, you have resistance to cold damage.
CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES 35

=== PAGE 36 ===
Yuan-ti
Yuan-ti were originally humans who transformed
themselves into serpent folk through ancient rituals.
Most yuan-ti were corrupted into monsters by those
rites, but some yuan-ti instead became a new people
who mix characteristics of humans and snakes.
Blessed with resistance to magical and poison­
ous effects by the rituals that created them, each of
these yuan-ti manifests their serpentine heritage
in a variety of ways: a forked tongue, snake eyes, a
snakelike nose, or some other ophidian characteris­
tic. However a yuan-ti looks, they have the power to
pursue great good or evil in the multiverse.
Yuan-ti Traits
As a yuan-ti, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium or Small. You choose the
size when you select this race.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
36 CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Magic Resistance. You have advantage on saving
throws against spells.
Poison Resilience. You have advantage on sav­
ing throws you make to avoid or end the poisoned
condition on yourself. You also have resistance to
poison damage.
Serpentine Spellcasting. You know the poison
spray cantrip. You can cast animal friendship an un­
limited number of times with this trait, but you can
target only snakes with it. Starting at 3rd level, you
can also cast suggestion with this trait. Once you
cast it, you can’t do so again until you finish a long
rest. You can also cast it using any spell slots you
have of 2nd level or higher.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for these spells when you cast them
with this trait (choose when you select this race).

=== PAGE 37 ===
B
estiar
HIS BESTIARY PROVIDES GAME STATISTICS
and lore for more than 250 monsters, which
are suitable for any D&D campaign. The
chapter includes old favorites from past edi­
tions of the game as well as creatures created for
the current edition.
This chapter is a companion to the Monster Man­
ual and adopts a similar presentation. If you are un­
familiar with the monster stat block format, read the
introduction of the Monster Manual before proceed­
ing further. It explains stat block terminology and
gives rules for various monster traits—information
that isn’t repeated here.
The creatures in this bestiary are organized alpha­
betically. A few are gathered under a group heading;
for example, the “Dinosaurs” section contains stat
blocks for various dinosaurs.
--col--
ry
Herein you will find some weapons that deal un­
usual damage types and spellcasting that functions
in atypical ways. Such an exception is a special
feature of a monster and represents how it uses
the weapon or casts its spells; the exception has
no affect on how a weapon or a spell functions for
someone else.
Finally, if a stat block contains the name of a class
in the monster’s name or in parentheses under the
name, the monster is considered a member of that
class for the purpose of meeting prerequisites for
magic items.
A»9 JneH* ,loye
wovxsiirous
