Flight. Because of your wings, you have a fly­
ing speed equal to your walking speed. You can’t
use this flying speed if you’re wearing medium or
heavy armor.
Talons. You have talons that you can use to make
unarmed strikes. When you hit with them, the strike
deals ld6 + your Strength modifier slashing dam­
age, instead of the bludgeoning damage normal for
an unarmed strike.
Wind Caller. Starting at 3rd level, you can cast
the gust of wind spell with this trait, without requir­
ing a material component. Once you cast the spell
with this trait, you can’t do so again until you finish
a long rest. You can also cast the spell using any
spell slots you have of 2nd level or higher.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for it when you cast gust of wind with
this trait (choose when you select this race).

=== PAGE 7 ===
Aasimar
Whether descended from a celestial being or in­
fused with heavenly power, aasimar are mortals
who carry a spark of the Upper Planes within their
souls. They can fan that spark to bring light, ease
wounds, and unleash the fury of the heavens.
Aasimar can arise among any population of mor­
tals. They resemble their parents, but they live for
up to 160 years and often have features that hint at
their celestial heritage. These often begin subtle and
become more obvious when the aasimar gains the
ability to reveal their full celestial nature. The Aasi­
mar Celestial Features table has examples you can
choose or use as inspiration to create your own.
Aasimar Celestial Features
d6 Celestial Feature
1 A dusting of metallic, white, or charcoal freckles
2 Metallic, luminous, or dark eyes
3 Starkly colored hair
4 An unusual hue tinting your shadow
5 A ghostly halo crowning your head
6 Rainbows gleaming on your skin
Aasimar Traits
As an aasimar, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium or Small. You choose the
size when you select this race.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Celestial Resistance. You have resistance to
necrotic damage and radiant damage.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Healing Hands. As an action, you can touch a
creature and roll a number of d4s equal to your
proficiency bonus. The creature regains a number
of hit points equal to the total rolled. Once you use
this trait, you can’t use it again until you finish a
long rest.
Light Bearer. You know the light cantrip. Cha­
risma is your spellcasting ability for it.
Celestial Revelation. When you reach 3rd level,
choose one of the revelation options below. There­
after, you can use a bonus action to unleash the
celestial energy within yourself, gaining the benefits
of that revelation. Your transformation lasts for 1
minute or until you end it as a bonus action. Once
you transform using your revelation below, you can’t
use it again until you finish a long rest:
Necrotic Shroud. Your eyes briefly become pools
of darkness, and ghostly, flightless wings sprout
from your back temporarily. Creatures other than
--col--
your allies within 10 feet of you that can see you
must succeed on a Charisma saving throw (DC 8
+ your proficiency bonus + your Charisma mod­
ifier) or become frightened of you until the end
of your next turn. Until the transformation ends,
once on each of your turns, you can deal extra
necrotic damage to one target when you deal dam­
age to it with an attack or a spell. The extra dam­
age equals your proficiency bonus.
Radiant Consumption. Searing light temporarily
radiates from your eyes and mouth. For the dura­
tion, you shed bright light in a 10-foot radius and
dim light for an additional 10 feet, and at the end
of each of your turns, each creature within 10 feet
of you takes radiant damage equal to your profi­
ciency bonus. Until the transformation ends, once
on each of your turns, you can deal extra radiant
damage to one target when you deal damage to it
with an attack or a spell. The extra damage equals
your proficiency bonus.
Radiant Soul. Two luminous, spectral wings sprout
from your back temporarily. Until the transfor­
mation ends, you have a flying speed equal to
your walking speed, and once on each of your
turns, you can deal extra radiant damage to one
target when you deal damage to it with an attack
or a spell. The extra damage equals your profi­
ciency bonus.
CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES

=== PAGE 8 ===
Bugbear
Neither bugs nor bears, bugbears are the hulking
cousins of goblins and hobgoblins. With roots in the
Feywild, early bugbears resided in hidden places, in
hard-to-reach and shadowed spaces. Long ago and
from out of the corner of your eye, they came to the
Material Plane, urged to spread throughout the mul­
tiverse by the conquering god Maglubiyet. Centuries
later, they still bear a fey gift for lurking just out of
sight, and many of them have sneaked away from
that god’s influence.
They are long of limb and covered in coarse hair,
with wedge-shaped ears and pointed teeth. Despite
their formidable build, bugbears are quiet skulkers,
thanks to a fey magic that allows them to hide in
spaces seemingly too small for them.
Bugbear Traits
As a bugbear, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid. You are also
considered a goblinoid for any prerequisite or effect
that requires you to be a goblinoid.
Size. Your size is Medium.
8 CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving
throws you make to avoid or end the charmed condi­
tion on yourself.
Long-Limbed. When you make a melee attack
on your turn, your reach for it is 5 feet greater
than normal.
Powerful Build. You count as one size larger
when determining your carrying capacity and the
weight you can push, drag, or lift.
Sneaky. You are proficient in the Stealth skill.
In addition, without squeezing, you can move
through and stop in a space large enough for a
Small creature.
Surprise Attack. If you hit a creature with an at­
tack roll, the creature takes an extra 2d6 damage if
it hasn’t taken a turn yet in the current combat.

=== PAGE 9 ===
Centaur
Centaurs gallop throughout the multiverse and trace
their origins to many different realms. The centaurs
presented here hail from the Feywild and mystically
resonate with the natural world. From the waist up,
they resemble elves, displaying all the elf varieties of
skin tone. From the waist down, they have the bod­
ies of horses.
Centaur Traits
As a centaur, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Fey.
Size. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 40 feet.
Charge. If you move at least 30 feet straight to­
ward a target and then hit it with a melee weapon
attack on the same turn, you can immediately follow
that attack with a bonus action, making one attack
against the target with your hooves.
--col--
Equine Build. You count as one size larger when
determining your carrying capacity and the weight
you can push or drag.
In addition, any climb that requires hands and feet
is especially difficult for you because of your equine
legs. When you make such a climb, each foot of
movement costs you 4 extra feet instead of the nor­
mal 1 extra foot.
Hooves. You have hooves that you can use to
make unarmed strikes. When you hit with them, the
strike deals ld6 + your Strength modifier bludgeon­
ing damage, instead of the bludgeoning damage nor­
mal for an unarmed strike.
Natural Affinity. Your fey connection to nature
gives you an intuitive connection to the natural
world and the animals within it. You therefore
have proficiency in one of the following skills of
your choice: Animal Handling, Medicine, Nature,
or Survival.
CHAPTER 1 I FANTASTICAL RACES

=== PAGE 10 ===
Changeling
With ever-changing appearances, changelings re­
side in many societies undetected. Each changeling
can supernaturally adopt any face they like. For
some changelings, a new face is only a disguise. For
other changelings, a new face may reveal an aspect
of their soul.
The first changelings in the multiverse appeared
in the Feywild, and the wondrous, mutable essence
of that plane lingers in changelings today—even in
those changelings who have never set foot in the fey
realm. Each changeling decides how to use their
shape-shifting ability, channeling either the peril or
the joy of the Feywild. Sometimes they adopt new
forms for the sake of mischief or malice, and other
times they don a new identity to right wrongs or de­
light the downtrodden.
io CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
In their true form, changelings appear faded, their
features almost devoid of detail. It is rare to see a
changeling in that form, for a typical changeling
changes their shape the way others might change
clothes. A casual shape—one created on the spur
of the moment, with no depth or history—is called
a mask. A mask can be used to express a mood or
to serve a specific purpose and then might never
be used again. However, many changelings develop
identities that have more depth, crafting whole per­
sonas complete with histories and beliefs. A change­
ling adventurer might have personas for many
situations, including negotiation, investigation,
and combat.
Personas can be shared by multiple change­
lings; a community might be home to three healer
changelings, with whoever is on duty adopting the
persona of Andrea, the gentle physician. Personas
can even be passed down through a family, allowing
a younger changeling to take advantage of contacts
established by the persona’s previous users.
Changeling Traits
As a changeling, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Fey.
Size. You are Medium or Small. You choose the
size when you select this race.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Changeling Instincts. Thanks to your connection
to the fey realm, you gain proficiency with two of the
following skills of your choice: Deception, Insight,
Intimidation, Performance, or Persuasion.
Shapechanger. As an action, you can change your
appearance and your voice. You determine the spe­
cifics of the changes, including your coloration, hair
length, and sex. You can also adjust your height and
weight and can change your size between Medium
and Small. You can make yourself appear as a mem­
ber of another race, though none of your game sta­
tistics change. You can’t duplicate the appearance
of an individual you’ve never seen, and you must
adopt a form that has the same basic arrangement
of limbs that you have. Your clothing and equipment
aren’t changed by this trait.
You stay in the new form until you use an action to
revert to your true form or until you die.

=== PAGE 11 ===
Deep Gnome
Deep gnomes, or svirfneblin, are natives of the Un­
derdark and are suffused with that subterranean
realm’s magic. They can supernaturally camouflage
themselves, and their svirfneblin magic renders
them difficult to locate. These abilities have enabled
them to survive for generations among the perils of
the Underdark.
Like other gnomes, deep gnomes can live for cen­
turies, up to 500 years.
Deep Gnome Traits
As a deep gnome, you have the following ra­
cial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid. You are also
considered a gnome for any prerequisite or effect
that requires you to be a gnome.
Size. You are Small.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 120
feet of you as if it were bright light and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
--col--
Gift of the Svirfneblin. Starting at 3rd level, you
can cast the disguise self spell with this trait. Start­
ing at 5th level, you can also cast the nondetection
spell with it, without requiring a material compo­
nent. Once you cast either of these spells with this
trait, you can’t cast that spell with it again until you
finish a long rest. You can also cast these spells us­
ing spell slots you have of the appropriate level.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for these spells when you cast them
with this trait (choose when you select this race).
Gnomish Magic Resistance. You have advantage
on Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving
throws against spells.
Svirfneblin Camouflage. When you make a Dex­
terity (Stealth) check, you can make the check with
advantage. You can use this trait a number of times
equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all
expended uses when you finish a long rest.
CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES II

=== PAGE 12 ===
Duergar
Duergar are dwarves whose ancestors were trans­
formed by centuries living in the deepest places of
the Underdark. That chthonic realm is saturated
with strange magical energy, and over generations,
early duergar absorbed traces of it. They were fur­
ther altered when mind flayers and other Aberra­
tions invaded and performed horrific experiments
on them. Fueled by Underdark magic, those experi­
ments left early duergar with psionic powers, which
have been passed down to their descendants. In
time, they liberated themselves from their aberrant
tyrants and forged a new life for themselves in the
Underdark and beyond.
Like other dwarves, duergar typically have a life
span of 350 years.
Duergar Traits
As a duergar, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid. You are also
considered a dwarf for any prerequisite or effect that
requires you to be a dwarf.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
12 CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 120
feet of you as if it were bright light and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Duergar Magic. Starting at 3rd level, you can cast
the enlarge/reduce spell on yourself with this trait,
without requiring a material component. Starting at
5th level, you can also cast the invisibility spell on
yourself with this trait, without requiring a material
component. Once you cast either of these spells with
this trait, you can’t cast that spell with it again until
you finish a long rest. You can also cast these spells
using spell slots you have of the appropriate level.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for these spells when you cast them
with this trait (choose when you select this race).
Dwarven Resilience. You have advantage on sav­
ing throws you make to avoid or end the poisoned
condition on yourself. You also have resistance to
poison damage.
Psionic Fortitude. You have advantage on saving
throws you make to avoid or end the charmed or
stunned condition on yourself.
KYZUW
ANNAZUZ
,YELDARB
REHPOTSIRHC

=== PAGE 13 ===
Eladrin
Eladrin are elves of the Feywild, a realm of perilous
beauty and boundless magic. Using that magic,
eladrin can step from one place to another in the
blink of an eye, and each eladrin resonates with
emotions captured in the Feywild in the form of
seasons—affinities that affect the eladrin’s mood
and appearance. An eladrin’s season can change,
though some remain in one season forever. Choose
your season or roll on the Eladrin Seasons table.
Your Trance trait lets you change your season.
Like other elves, eladrin can live to be over 750
years old.
Eladrin Seasons
d4 Season
1 Autumn: peace and goodwill, when summer’s har­
vest is shared with all
2 Winter: contemplation and dolor, when the vibrant
energy of the world slumbers
3 Spring: cheerfulness and celebration, marked by
merriment and hope as winter’s sorrow passes
4 Summer: boldness and aggression, a time of un­
fettered energy and calls to action
Eladrin Traits
As an eladrin, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid. You are also
considered an elf for any prerequisite or effect that
requires you to be an elf.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving
throws you make to avoid or end the charmed condi­
tion on yourself.
Fey Step. As a bonus action, you can magically
teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you
can see. You can use this trait a number of times
equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all
expended uses when you finish a long rest.
When you reach 3rd level, your Fey Step gains an
additional effect based on your season; if the effect
requires a saving throw, the DC equals 8 + your pro­
ficiency bonus + your Intelligence, Wisdom, or Cha­
risma modifier (choose when you select this race):
Autumn. Immediately after you use your Fey Step,
up to two creatures of your choice that you can see
within 10 feet of you must succeed on a Wisdom
saving throw or be charmed by you for 1 minute,
or until you or your companions deal any damage
to the creatures.
--col--
Winter. When you use your Fey Step, one creature
of your choice that you can see within 5 feet of you
before you teleport must succeed on a Wisdom
saving throw or be frightened of you until the end
of your next turn.
Spring. When you use your Fey Step, you can touch
one willing creature within 5 feet of you. That
creature then teleports instead of you, appearing
in an unoccupied space of your choice that you
can see within 30 feet of you.
Summer. Immediately after you use your Fey Step,
each creature of your choice that you can see
within 5 feet of you takes fire damage equal to
your proficiency bonus.
Keen Senses. You have proficiency in the Percep­
tion skill.
Trance. You don’t need to sleep, and magic can’t
put you to sleep. You can finish a long rest in 4
hours if you spend those hours in a trancelike medi­
tation, during which you retain consciousness.
Whenever you finish this trance, you can change
your season, and you can gain two proficiencies that
you don’t have, each one with a weapon or a tool of
your choice selected from the Player’s Handbook.
You mystically acquire these proficiencies by draw­
ing them from shared elven memory, and you retain
them until you finish your next long rest.
CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES 13

=== PAGE 14 ===
14 CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
Fairy
The Feywild is home to many fantastic peoples,
including fairies. Fairies are a wee folk, but not
nearly as much so as their pixie and sprite friends.
The first fairies spoke Elvish, Goblin, or Sylvan, and
encounters with human visitors prompted many of
them to learn Common as well.
Infused with the magic of the Feywild, most fair­
ies look like Small elves with insectile wings, but
each fairy has a special physical characteristic that
sets the fairy apart. For your fairy, roll on the Fey
Characteristics table or choose an option from it.
You’re also free to come up with your own char­
acteristic if none of the suggestions below fit your
character.
Fey Characteristics
d8 Characteristic
1 Your wings are like those of a bird.
2 You have shimmering, multicolored skin.
3 You have exceptionally large ears.
4 A glittering mist constantly surrounds you.
5 You have a small spectral horn on your forehead,
like a little unicorn horn.
6 Your legs are insectile.
7 You smell like fresh brownies.
8 A noticeable, harmless chill surrounds you.
Fairy Traits
As a fairy, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Fey.
Size. You are Small.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Fairy Magic. You know the druidcraft cantrip.
Starting at 3rd level, you can cast the faerie fire
spell with this trait. Starting at 5th level, you can
also cast the enlarge/reduce spell with this trait.
Once you cast faerie fire or enlarge/reduce with this
trait, you can’t cast that spell with it again until you
finish a long rest. You can also cast either of those
spells using any spell slots you have of the appro­
priate level.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for these spells when you cast them
with this trait (choose when you select this race).
Flight. Because of your wings, you have a fly­
ing speed equal to your walking speed. You can’t
use this flying speed if you’re wearing medium or
heavy armor.

=== PAGE 15 ===
Firbolg
Distant cousins of giants, the first firbolgs wandered
the primeval forests of the multiverse, and the
magic of those forests entwined itself with the fir­
bolgs’ souls. Centuries later, that magic still thrums
inside a firbolg, even one who has never lived under
the boughs of a great forest.
