nonmagical attacks not made with silvered weapons
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages understands Common, Elvish, and Sylvan but can’t
speak
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Sunlight Banishment. If the yeth hound starts its turn in sun­
light, it is transported to the Ethereal Plane. While sunlight
shines on the spot from which it vanished, the hound must re­
main in the Deep Ethereal. After sunset, it returns to the Border
Ethereal at the same spot, whereupon it typically sets out to
find its pack or its master. The hound is visible on the Material
Plane while it is in the Border Ethereal, and vice versa, but it
can’t affect or be affected by anything on the other plane. Once
it is adjacent to its master or a pack mate that is on the Mate­
rial Plane, a yeth hound in the Border Ethereal can return to the
Material Plane as an action.
Telepathic Bond. While the yeth hound is on the same plane of
existence as its master, it can magically convey what it senses
to its master, and the two can communicate telepathically with
each other.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage, plus 14 (4d6) psychic dam­
age if the target is frightened.
Baleful Baying. The yeth hound bays magically. Every enemy
within 300 feet of the hound that can hear it must succeed on a
DC 13 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened of the hound until
the end of the hound’s next turn or until the hound is incapac­
itated. A frightened target that starts its turn within 30 feet of
the hound must use all its movement on that turn to get as far
from the hound as possible, must finish the move before taking
an action, and must take the most direct route, even if hazards
lie that way. A target that successfully saves is immune to the
baying of all yeth hounds for the next 24 hours.
--col--
Yeth Hound
Granted by mighty Fey to individuals who please
them, yeth hounds serve their masters like hunting
dogs. They race in pursuit of their prey, running it
down until it’s too exhausted to fight back. Only the
threat of dawn drives the pack back into hiding.
A pack of yeth hounds can be created by powerful
Fey such as the Queen of Air and Darkness. Each
pack’s master can telepathically communicate with
their yeth hounds to give the pack commands from
afar. If a pack’s master is killed, the hounds seek out
a new master, typically an evil vampire, necroman­
cer, or hag (all appear in the Monster Manual).
A yeth hound stands about 5 feet tall at the shoul­
der and weighs around 400 pounds. Its head has a
human-like face and glowing red eyes. The creature
gives off a smoky odor.
Yeth hounds make a ghastly baying sound that
causes most creatures to flee in terror. They chase
those who run and torment them before closing in
for the kill. Those that fight back discover that mun­
dane weapons partially pass through yeth hounds
as if they were made of fog, but magic weapons and
silvered weapons can strike true.
Yeth hounds can’t stand sunlight. A pack hunts
at night and seeks to return to its dark den before
dawn. If a yeth hound is exposed to natural sunlight,
it fades away, vanishing into the Ethereal Plane, and
its master can retrieve it only after sunset.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 271

=== PAGE 272 ===
Yuan-ti Anathema
As part of their quest for godhood, a yuan-ti abom­
ination might perform a ritual that, if successful,
transforms them into an even greater form: a yuan-ti
anathema. This ritual demands the sacrifice of hun­
dreds of snakes and requires the abomination to
bathe in the blood of their enemies. The transforma­
tion is quick but painful.
Anathemas consider themselves demigods on the
path to greater divinity. They demand obeisance
from weaker creatures and use every resource at
their disposal to war against neighbors, seeking the
captives, sacrifices, glory, and riches the anathemas
believe they need to achieve true divinity.
Anathemas don’t age, allowing them to pursue
their goals until the end of days. Truly powerful
ones might rule multiple yuan-ti cities and bring en­
tire regions under their control.
272 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Yuan-ti Anathema
Huge Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 189 (18dl2+ 72)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
23 (+6) 13 (+1) 19 (+4) 19 (+4) 17 (+3) 20 (+5)
Skills Perception +11, Stealth +5
Damage Resistances acid, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 21
Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Magic Resistance. The anathema has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Ophidiophobia Aura. Any creature of the anathema’s choice,
other than a snake or a yuan-ti, that starts its turn within 30
feet of the anathema must succeed on a DC 17 Wisdom saving
throw or become frightened of snakes and yuan-ti. A fright­
ened target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of
its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a target’s
saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, the target is
immune to this anathama’s aura for the next 24 hours.
Six Heads. The anathema has advantage on saves against being
blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, stunned, or knocked
unconscious.
Actions
Multiattack (Anathema Form Only). The anathema makes two
Claw attacks and one Flurry of Bites attack.
Claw (Anathema Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit,
reach 10 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Flurry of Bites (Anathema Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack:
+10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature. Hit: T1 (6d6 + 6) piercing
damage plus 14 (4d6) poison damage.
Constrict (Snake Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit,
reach 15 ft., one Large or smaller creature. Hit: 16 (3d6 + 6)
bludgeoning damage plus 7 (2d6) acid damage, and the target
is grappled (escape DC 16). Until this grapple ends, the target
is restrained, and it takes 16 (3d6 + 6) bludgeoning damage
plus 7 (2d6) acid damage at the start of each of its turns. The
anathema can constrict only one creature at a time.
Spellcasting (Anathema Form Only). The anathema casts one
of the following spells, requiring no material components and
using Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 17):
At will: animal friendship (snakes only)
3/day each: darkness, entangle, fear, polymorph, suggestion
Bonus Actions
Change Shape. The anathema transforms into a Huge constric­
tor snake or back into its true form. Its statistics are the same
in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn’t
transformed.

=== PAGE 273 ===
TTEDRUB
REHPOTSIRHC
Yuan-ti Broodguard
Broodguards were once Humanoids, but they have
been transformed by yuan-ti into simpleminded,
scaly Monstrosities that do their serpentine mas­
ters’ bidding. The transformation process warps not
only a subject’s body but also their mind, making
them instinctively obey any yuan-ti and filling them
with a seething rage at the sight of non-reptilian
creatures.
Although broodguards can no longer think as
clearly as before their transformation, they are able
to perform simple yet important tasks in the com­
munity, such as guarding eggs or patrolling for in­
truders. Yuan-ti refer to broodguards as “histachii,”
which means “egg-watchers.”
Most broodguards are made from human captives
forced to consume a magical brew that renders
them helpless and unable to fight off the inevitable
transformation. A human transformed into a brood­
guard loses all semblance of who they once were.
A broodguard is hairless and emaciated, with scaly
skin. They have a forked tongue, and they smell
faintly of rotting meat. Broodguards can speak but
rarely do so, preferring to communicate via snake­
like hisses and guttural noises.
Making a Broodguard
Yuan-ti create broodguards from captured Human­
oids. Each subject is fed a special potion that im­
mediately renders it incapacitated and transforms
it into a broodguard over the next ld6 + 6 days. A
subject forced to imbibe the brew can make a DC 15
Constitution saving throw; on a success, it takes 14
(4d6) poison damage and is otherwise unaffected.
A spell such as lesser restoration or remove curse
can end the transformation process at any time be­
fore it runs its course. After the process is complete,
only a wish spell can reverse the effect.
--col--
Yuan-ti Broodguard
Medium Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 45 (7d8 + 14)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 6 (-2) 11 (+0) 4 (-3)
Saving Throws Str +4, Dex +4, Wis +2
Skills Perception +2
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, paralyzed, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Reckless. At the start of its turn, the broodguard can gain ad­
vantage on all melee weapon attack rolls it makes during that
turn, but attack rolls against it have advantage until the start of
its next turn.
Actions
Multiattack. The broodguard makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (1 d8 + 2) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) slashing damage.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 273

=== PAGE 274 ===
Yuan-ti Mind Whisperer
Mind whisperers are yuan-ti malison spellcasters
who enter into a pact with the serpent god Sseth,
the Sibilant Death. They use their abilities to con­
vert others to their faith, increase their personal
power, and befuddle the minds of their enemies.
Mind whisperers are elusive, manipulative, unpre­
dictable, and willing to cheat or kill comrades and
rivals alike if doing so benefits them. The worship­
ers of Sseth have their hands in many schemes, of­
ten plying the middle ground between two factions,
and thus spend a lot of energy making sure none of
their allies learn of their conflicting connections.
Even among Sseth-worshiping communities, mind
whisperers are known for being self-important,
sneaky, and prone to flee at the first sign of trouble.
274 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Yuan-ti Mind Whisperer
Medium Monstrosity (Warlock), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 71 (13d8 + 13)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Wis +4, Cha +5
Skills Deception +5, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the yuan-ti’s
darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The yuan-ti has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Sseth’s Blessing. When the yuan-ti reduces an enemy to 0 hit
points, the yuan-ti gains 9 temporary hit points.
Actions
Multiattack. The yuan-ti makes two Bite attacks and one Scimi­
tar attack, or it makes two Spectral Fangs attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (1 d4 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) poison damage.
Scimitar (Yuan-ti Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit,
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.
Spectral Fangs. Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 120 ft., one
target. Hit: 16 (3d8 + 3) psychic damage.
Spellcasting (Yuan-ti Form Only). The yuan-ti casts one of the
following spells, requiring no material components and using
Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 13):
At will: animal friendship (snakes only), message, minor illusion,
prestidigitation
3/day: suggestion
2/day each: detect thoughts, hypnotic pattern
Bonus Actions
Change Shape. The yuan-ti transforms into a Medium snake or
back into its true form. Its statistics are the same in each form.
Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn’t transformed. If it
dies, it stays in its current form.

=== PAGE 275 ===
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Wis +3, Cha +5
Skills Deception +5, Stealth +4
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the yuan-ti’s
darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The yuan-ti has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The yuan-ti makes one Constrict attack and one
Scimitar attack, or it makes two Spectral Fangs attacks.
Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage, and the target
is grappled (escape DC 14) if it is a Large or smaller creature.
Until this grapple ends, the target is restrained. The yuan-ti can
constrict only one creature at a time.
--col--
Yuan-ti Nightmare Speaker
Nightmare speakers are yuan-ti malison priests
who make a pact with the Dendar the Night Serpent
to feed their deity the fears and nightmares of their
victims in exchange for power in the mortal world.
These priests receive nightmarish visions from Den­
dar that they interpret as prophecies, and they then
use their magic and influence to make these visions
come true.
Nightmare speakers revel in torturing others,
keeping their victims in a constant state of fear and
dread. They prefer to terrify rather than kill their
opponents. They manipulate communities for the
purpose of acquiring more victims and enjoy the
company of Undead.
Scimitar (Yuan-ti Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit,
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1 d6 + 3) slashing damage.
Spectral Fangs. Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 120 ft.,
one target. Hit: 16 (3d8 + 3) necrotic damage.
Invoke Nightmare (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The
yuan-ti taps into the nightmares of one creature it can see
within 60 feet of it and creates an illusory, immobile manifesta­
tion of the creature’s deepest fears, visible only to that creature.
The target must make a DC 13 Intelligence saving throw. On
a failed save, the target takes 22 (4dl0) psychic damage and
is frightened of the manifestation, believing it to be real. The
yuan-ti must concentrate to maintain the illusion (as if concen­
trating on a spell), which lasts for up to 1 minute and can’t be
harmed. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the illusion on a success or taking 11
(2dl0) psychic damage on a failure.
Spellcasting (Yuan-ti Form Only). The yuan-ti casts one of the
following spells, requiring no material components and using
Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 13):
At will: animal friendship (snakes only), mage hand, message,
prestidigitation
3/day: suggestion
2/day each: darkness, fear
Bonus Actions
Change Shape. The yuan-ti transforms into a Medium snake or
back into its true form. Its statistics are the same in each form.
Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn’t transformed. If it
dies, it stays in its current form.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 275

=== PAGE 276 ===
Yuan-ti Pit Master
With snakes for arms, pit masters are yuan-ti mal­
ison priests who have made a pact with the god
Merrshaulk and seek to rouse him from his slumber
by sacrificing Humanoids to him. They are the most
traditionalist yuan-ti and believe that they are best
equipped to achieve the goals of their people.
Pit masters are deeply involved in yuan-ti’s long­
term plan to take over Humanoid governments, as
well as in the ongoing effort to protect their cities
from discovery or attacks by hostiles. They oppose
reckless behavior and argue for a slow, cautious ap­
proach in all matters.
276 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Yuan-ti Pit Master
Medium Monstrosity (Warlock), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 88 (16d8 + 16)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Wis +4, Cha +6
Skills Deception +6, Stealth +5
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the yuan-ti’s
darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The yuan-ti has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The yuan-ti makes three Bite attacks or two Spec­
tral Fangs attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (1 d4 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) poison damage.
Spectral Fangs. Ranged Spell Attack: +6 to hit, range 120 ft.,
one target. Hit: 16 (3d8 + 3) poison damage.
Merrshaulk’s Slumber (1/Day). The yuan-ti targets up to five
creatures that it can see within 60 feet of it. Each target must
succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or fall into a
magical sleep and be unconscious for 10 minutes. A sleeping
target awakens if it takes damage or if someone uses an action
to shake or slap it awake. This magical sleep has no effect on a
creature immune to being charmed.
Spellcasting (Yuan-ti Form Only). The yuan-ti casts one of the
following spells, requiring no material components and using
Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 14):
At will: animal friendship (snakes only), guidance, mage
hand, message
3/day: suggestion
2/day each: hold person, invisibility
Bonus Actions
Change Shape. The yuan-ti transforms into a Medium snake or
back into its true form. Its statistics are the same in each form.
Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn’t transformed. It
doesn’t change form if it dies.
-........■ 1 1 .............................................-

=== PAGE 277 ===
EMPLE
Level 5: Temple Mount
[MalisonJ
QUARTERS]
Eibrar;
Level 4: Malison level
■gULTIsJ \CULT£ST^
[QUARTER* ^Quarters;
KSUARDj
Temple
Shrine
EuardI
gGUtlTISTJJb
[QUARTERS
ltist Level
ODNAL8
DERAJ
--col--
Level 3: Abomination level
E
BPM IN BPM I NATI.QNI
Quarter's! LQUARTERSM
Gathering
Hall
[ABOMINATIOI ptepMINATI.O.1
BtOU ARTERS]
f Egg il
UH EAT PHAMBEffl
ROOM IBHEA T E
» t a -IbathJ
Shrine
EYuan-ti,
[Chamber1
^Torture]
jCHA’MBERJ
rSTOREROOI
Armor?
-JAND 7
SMITHY Kitchen
S
ide view
Level 5
Level 4
Level 2
Level 1
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY

=== PAGE 278 ===
Zaratan
When a zaratan is summoned from the Ele­
mental Plane of Earth, the ground rises up to
take the shape of a hulking, armored reptile.
A zaratan’s steps trigger shock waves severe
enough to level structures. It expresses its rage
through trumpeting calls and the occasional
boulder or blast of debris it spews from its
cavernous maw. If seriously injured, a zaratan
retracts its appendages to gain shelter beneath
its impervious shell, biding its time until it re­
covers and can resume its march.
Zaratan
Gargantuan Elemental, Typically Neutral
Armor Class 21 (natural armor)
Hit Points 307 (15d20 + 150)
Speed 40 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
30 (+10) 10 (+0) 30 (+10) 2 (-4) 21 (+5) 18 (+4)
Saving Throws Wis +12, Cha +11
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, paralyzed, petrified,
poisoned, stunned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages —
Challenge 22 (41,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the zaratan fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Siege Monster. The elemental deals double damage to objects
and structures (included in Earth-Shaking Movement).
Actions
Multiattack. The zaratan makes one Bite attack and one
Stomp attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target.
Hit: 28 (4d8 + 10) force damage.
Stomp. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 20 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 26 (3dl0 + 10) thunder damage.
Spit Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, range 120 ft./240
ft., one target. Hit: 31 (6d8 + 10) force damage.
Spew Debris (Recharge 5-6). The zaratan exhales rocky debris
in a 90-foot cube. Each creature in that area must make a DC
25 Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 33 (6dl0) blud­
geoning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
a successful one. A creature that fails the save by 5 or more is
knocked prone.
278 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Earth-Shaking Movement. After moving at least 10 feet on the
