TASHA
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY

=== PAGE 38 ===
A
bishais
Each abishai was once a mortal who
somehow won Tiamat’s favor before
death and, as a reward, found its soul
transformed into a draconic devil to serve
at her pleasure in the Nine Hells. Each
type of abishai is associated with one of
Tiamat’s five dragon heads: black, blue,
green, red, and white.
Tiamat deploys abishais as her agents,
sending them forth to represent her
interests in the Hells and across the mul­
tiverse. Some have simple tasks, such as
delivering a message to cultists. Others
have greater responsibilities, such as
leading large groups, assassinating tar­
gets, and serving in armies. In all cases,
abishais are fanatically loyal to Tiamat,
ready to lay down their lives if needed.
Abishais stand outside the normal hierarchy of
the Nine Hells, having their own chain of command
and ultimately answering to Tiamat (and Asmodeus,
when he chooses to use them). Other archdevils can
command abishais to work for them, but most arch­
devils do so rarely, since it is never clear whether
an abishai follows Tiamat’s orders or Asmodeus’s.
There is inherent risk in countermanding an order
given by Tiamat, but interfering with Asmodeus’s
plans invites certain destruction.
B A
lack bishai
Medium Fiend (Devil), Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 58 (9d8 + 18)
Speed 30 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 17 (+3) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 16 (+3) 11 (+0)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +6
Skills Perception +6, Stealth +6
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities acid, fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Draconic, Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the abishai's
darkvision.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
38
--col--
,
n
­
B A
lack bishai
Expert assassins and infiltrators, black abishais can
weave shadows to mask their presence, allowing
them to reach a location where they can deliver a
fatal strike to their targets.
Magic Resistance. The abishai has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
A
ctions
Multiattack. The abishai makes one Bite attack and two Scim­
itar attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (IdlO + 3) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8) acid damage.
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 6 (1 d6 + 3) force damage.
Creeping Darkness (Recharge 6). The abishai casts darkness at
a point within 120 feet of it, requiring no spell components or
concentration. Wisdom is its spellcasting ability for this spell.
While the spell persists, the abishai can move the area of dark­
ness up to 60 feet as a bonus action.
B A
onus ctions
Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the abishai
takes the Hide action.

=== PAGE 39 ===
Blue Abishai
Seekers of forgotten lore and lost relics, blue
abishais are the most cunning and learned of their
kind. Their research into occult subjects gleaned
from tomes plundered from across the multiverse
enables them to become accomplished spellcasters.
They use their magic to devastate Tiamat’s enemies.
Green Abishai
Green abishais are adept at discovering secrets and
other sensitive information, while their diplomatic
skills and their magic ensure they can manipulate
even the shrewdest opponents.
Red Abishai
Red abishais have no equals among the abishais
when it comes to leadership ability and raw power.
Red abishais lead other devils into battle or take
charge of troublesome cults to ensure that they
continue to carry out Tiamat’s commands. A red
abishai cuts a fearsome figure, and that sight can be
inspiring to the abishai’s allies, filling them with a
fanatical willingness to fight.
White Abishai
White abishais fight with a reckless fury, making
them ideally suited for bolstering the ranks of Tia­
mat’s armies. White abishais fight without fear, be­
coming whirlwinds of destruction on the battlefield.
Blue Abishai
Medium Fiend (Devil, Wizard), Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 202 (27d8 + 81)
Speed 30 ft., fly 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 14 (+2) 17 (+3) 22 (+6) 23 (+6) 18 (+4)
Saving Throws I nt +12, Wis +12
Skills Arcana +12
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities fire, lightning, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Draconic, Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +6
Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the abishai’s
darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The abishai has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
1 " - - -- ■ ■ ----- ■ - - -*- ■'-**•J---------•«-
--col--
Actions
Multiattack. The abishai makes three Bite or Lightning
Strike attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 13 (2dl0 + 2) piercing damage plus 14 (4d6) light­
ning damage.
Lightning Strike. Ranged Spell Attack: +12 to hit, range 120 ft.,
one target. Hit: 36 (8d8) lightning damage.
Spellcasting. The abishai casts one of the following spells, us­
ing Intelligence as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 20):
At will: disguise self, mage hand, minor illusion
2/day each: charm person, dispel magic, greater invisibility,
wall of force
Bonus Actions
Teleport. The abishai teleports, along with any equipment it is
wearing or carrying, up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space that
it can see.
- - - -
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 39

=== PAGE 40 ===
G A
reen bishai
Medium Fiend (Devil), Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 195 (26d8 + 78)
Speed 30 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
12 (+1) 17 (+3) 16 (+3) 17 (+3) 12 (+1) 19 (+4)
Saving Throws Int +8, Cha +9
Skills Deception +9, Insight +6, Perception +6, Persuasion +9
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Draconic, Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the abishai’s
darkvision.
R A
ed bishai
Medium Fiend (Devil), Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 22 (natural armor)
Hit Points 289 (34d8+ 136)
Speed 30 ft., fly 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
23 (+6) 16 (+3) 19 (+4) 14 (+2) 15 (+2) 19 (+4)
Saving Throws Str +12, Con +10, Wis +8
Skills Intimidation +10, Perception +8
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages Draconic, Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 19 (22,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +6
Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the abishai's
darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The abishai has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
A
ctions
Multiattack. The abishai makes one Bite attack and one Claw
attack, and it can use Frightful Presence or Incite Fanaticism.
i. .... . —......
40 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Magic Resistance. The abishai has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
A
ctions
Multiattack. The abishai makes two Fiendish Claw attacks, or it
makes one Fiendish Claw attack and uses Spellcasting.
Fiendish Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) force damage. If the target is a crea­
ture, it must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or
take 16 (3dl0) poison damage and become poisoned for 1 min­
ute. The poisoned target can repeat the saving throw at the end
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Spellcasting. The abishai casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 17):
At will: alter self major image
3/day each: charm person, detect thoughts, fear
1/day each: confusion, dominate person, mass suggestion
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 22 (3dl0 + 6) piercing damage plus 38 (7dl0) fire damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2dl0 + 6) force damage plus 11 (2dl0) fire damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of the abishai’s choice that
is within 120 feet and aware of the abishai must succeed on a
DC 18 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened of it for 1
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to the abishai’s Frightful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Incite Fanaticism. The abishai chooses up to four other crea­
tures within 60 feet of it that can see it. Until the start of the
abishai’s next turn, each of those creatures makes attack rolls
with advantage and can’t be frightened.
Power of the Dragon Queen. The abishai targets one Dragon it
can see within 120 feet of it. The Dragon must make a DC 18
Charisma saving throw. A chromatic dragon makes this save
with disadvantage. On a successful save, the target is immune
to the abishai’s Power of the Dragon Queen for 1 hour. On
a failed save, the target is charmed by the abishai for 1 hour.
While charmed in this way, the target regards the abishai as a
trusted friend to be heeded and protected. This effect ends if
the abishai or its companions deal damage to the target.

=== PAGE 41 ===
White Abishai
Medium Fiend (Devil), Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 68 (8d8 + 32)
Speed 30 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 11 (+0) 18 (+4) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 13 (+1)
Saving Throws Str +6, Con +7
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities cold, fire, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Draconic, Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the abishai’s
darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The abishai has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
--col--
- ................—........ . . . . ।
Reckless. At the start of its turn, the abishai can gain advantage
on all melee weapon attack rolls during that turn, but attack
rolls against it have advantage until the start of its next turn.
Actions
Multiattack. The abishai makes one Bite attack, one Claw at­
tack, and one Longsword attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (1 d4 + 3) piercing damage plus 3 (1 d6) cold damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (IdlO + 3) slashing damage.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) force damage, or 8 (IdlO + 3) force
damage if used with two hands.
Reactions
Vicious Reprisal. In response to taking damage, the abishai
makes one Bite attack against a random creature within 5 feet
of it. If no creature is within reach, the abishai moves up to
half its speed toward an enemy it can see, without provoking
opportunity attacks.
-.......... —-i
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 41

=== PAGE 42 ===
Alhoon
Mind flayers that pursue arcane magic are exiled as
deviants, and for them no everlasting communion
with an elder brain (appears in this book) is possi­
ble. The road to lichdom offers an alternative way
to escape the permanency of death, but that path is
long and fraught with barriers. Alhoons are mind
flayers who have used a shortcut to attain a lich-
like state.
Elder brains forbid mind flayers from pursuing
magic power aside from psionics, but it isn’t an in­
terdiction they must often enforce. Illithids brook no
masters but members of their own kind, so it isn’t
in their nature to bow to any god or otherworldly
patron. However, wizardry remains a temptation. In
the pages of a spellbook, an illithid sees a system to
acquire authority. Through the writings of the wiz­
ard who penned it, the illithid perceives the work­
ings of a highly intelligent mind. Most mind flayers
who find a spellbook react with abhorrence or indif­
ference, but for some, a spellbook is a gateway to a
new way of thinking.
For a time, the study of such forbidden texts can
be hidden from other illithids and even from an
elder brain. Yet eventually, mind flayer arcanists
determined to pursue wizardry must flee the colony
for their own safety. Once they taste freedom from
the colony, some prize their privacy, others seek to
commune with similar minds, and still others seek
to dominate a colony by elevating themselves to the
position of leadership normally held by an elder
brain. Regardless, all such arcanists face the same
stark fact: when they die, they will not join the host
of minds in the elder brain—deviant minds are never
accepted as part of the collective. For them, death
means oblivion.
Lichdom offers salvation and the prospect of being
able to pursue knowledge indefinitely. Yet learning
the secret of achieving lichdom requires an arcane
spellcaster to be at the apex of power—a significant
challenge for mind flayers, given the scarcity of
available mentors and training.
Confronting this reality, a group of nine mind
flayer arcanists used their arcane magic and psion­
ics to weave a new truth. These nine called them­
selves the Alhoon, and those who follow in their
footsteps are referred to by the same name.
4,2 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Collaborative Undeath
To become alhoons, mind flayer arcanists must co­
operate in the creation of a periapt of mind trapping,
a fist-sized container made of silver, emerald, and
amethyst. The process requires at least three mind
flayer arcanists and the sacrifice of an equal number
of souls from living victims in a three-day-long ritual
of spellcasting and psionic communion. Upon its
completion, free-willed undeath is conferred on the
mind flayers, turning them into alhoons.
Initially, an alhoon can be difficult to distinguish
from a normal mind flayer. The most obvious dif­
ference is the lack of a mind flayer’s ever-present
mucus coating. Without that protection, an alhoon’s
skin becomes dry and cracked, and its eyes might
appear shriveled and sunken. Both of these clues
are easily missed by someone who hasn’t seen a
mind flayer. However, in short order, an alhoon’s
flesh withers away and its empty eye sockets gleam
with cold pinpricks of light like those of other liches.
Unlike a true lich’s phylactery, the periapt of mind
trapping doesn’t restore the alhoons to undeath if
they are destroyed. Instead, a destroyed alhoon’s
mind is transferred to the periapt, where it remains
in communion with any other trapped alhoon
minds, as well as the souls of those sacrificed.
The undeath conferred by a periapt of mind trap­
ping lasts only so long as the life of the living victim
selected. Thus an alhoon who sacrificed a 200-year-
old elf looks forward to a much longer existence
than one that sacrificed a 35-year-old person. Al­
hoons can extend their existence by repeating the
ritual with new victims, effectively resetting the
clocks for themselves.
Destroying a periapt of mind trapping consigns
those trapped within it to oblivion, and thus alhoons
often work together to create elaborate protections
for their periapt and their preferred ritual site.
Sometimes a single alhoon is entrusted with the
periapt of mind trapping, but this is a dangerous
proposition. Anyone who holds the periapt gains
advantage on attacks, saving throws, and checks
against the alhoons associated with its creation,
and those alhoons in turn suffer disadvantage on at­
tacks, saving throws, and checks against the holder.
In addition, the holder can telepathically commu­
nicate with any sacrificed soul trapped within, and
alhoons within the periapt can speak telepathically
with the holder. A creature carrying the periapt
can’t prevent communication from alhoons but can
silence trapped souls.

=== PAGE 43 ===
Alhoon
Medium Undead (Mind Flayer, Wizard), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 150 (20d8 + 60)
Speed 30 ft., fly 15 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
11 (+0) 12 (+1) 16 (+3) 19 (+4) 17 (+3) 17 (+3)
Saving Throws Con +7, Int +8, Wis +7, Cha +7
Skills Arcana +8, Deception +7, History +8, Insight +7,
Perception +7, Stealth +5
Damage Resistances cold, lightning, necrotic
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Magic Resistance. The alhoon has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Turn Resistance. The alhoon has advantage on saving throws
against any effect that turns Undead.
Actions_________________________________
Multiattack. The alhoon makes two Chilling Grasp or Arcane
Bolt attacks.
Chilling Grasp. Melee Spell Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 14 (4d6) cold damage, and the alhoon regains 14
hit points.
Arcane Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +8 to hit, range 120 ft., one
target. Hit: 28 (8d6) force damage.
Mind Blast (Recharge 5-6). The alhoon magically emits psy­
chic energy in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must
succeed on a DC 16 Intelligence saving throw or take 22 (4d8 +
4) psychic damage and be stunned for 1 minute. A target can
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending
the effect on itself on a success.
Spellcasting. The alhoon casts one of the following spells, re­
quiring no material components and using Intelligence as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 16):
At will: dancing lights, detect magic, detect thoughts, disguise self,
mage hand, prestidigitation
1/day each: dominate monster, globe of invulnerability, invisibility,
modify memory, plane shift (self only), wall offorce
Reactions
Negate Spell (3/Day). The alhoon targets one creature it can
see within 60 feet of it that is casting a spell. If the spell is 3rd
level or lower, the spell fails, but any spell slots or charges are
not wasted.
....................................1 .. ..
--col--
_______
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 43

=== PAGE 44 ===
Alkilith
An alkilith is easily mistaken for some kind of foul
fungal growth that appears on doorways, windows,
and other portals. These dripping infestations
conceal the demonic nature of the alkilith, making
what should be a dire warning appear strange but
otherwise innocuous. Wherever alkiliths take root,
they weaken the fabric of reality, creating a portal
through which even nastier demons can invade.
The appearance of an alkilith in the world heralds
a great wrongness and an imminent catastrophe.
An alkilith searches for an aperture such as a win­
dow or a door around which it can take root, stretch­
ing its body around the opening and anchoring itself
with a sticky secretion. If left undisturbed, the open­
ing becomes attuned to the Abyss and eventually
becomes a portal to that plane (see “Planar Portals”
in the Dungeon Master’s Guide).
Alkiliths spring from cast-off bits of the hideous,
shuddering body of Juiblex (appears in this book).
They gradually become self-aware and seek to find
their way onto the Material Plane. Since most cult­
ists consider them too risky to summon—they can,
after all, create portals to the Abyss—alkiliths must
find other escape routes out of their native plane.
44 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Alkilith
Medium Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 168 (16d8 + 96)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
12 (+1) 19 (+4) 22 (+6) 6 (-2) 11 (+0) 7 H)
Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +10
Skills Stealth +8
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands Abyssal but can’t speak
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Abyssal Rift. If the alkilith surrounds a door, window, or similar
opening continuously for 6d6 days, the opening becomes a per­
manent portal to a random layer of the Abyss.
Amorphous. The alkilith can move through a space as narrow as
1 inch wide without squeezing.
False Appearance. If the alkilith is motionless at the start of
combat, it has advantage on its initiative roll. Moreover, if a
creature hasn't observed the alkilith move or act, that creature
must succeed on a DC 18 Intelligence (Investigation) check to
discern that the alkilith isn't ordinary slime or fungus.
Foment Confusion. Any creature that isn’t a demon that starts
