--col--
Gauth
A gauth is a hungry, tyrannical creature similar to
a beholder that eats magic and tries to exact tribute
from anything weaker than itself. Its body is about
4 feet in diameter, with six eyestalks, a central eye
(sometimes surrounded by multiple smaller eyes),
and four small grasping tentacles near its mouth.
It has color and texture variations similar to a
true beholder.
A gauth can survive on meat but prefers to sustain
itself with power drained from magic objects. If
starved of magic for several weeks, it is forced back
to its home plane, so it constantly seeks new items
to drain. A gauth might employ creatures to bring it
items that can provide it with sustenance.
When the ritual to summon a spectator goes
wrong, a gauth might push itself through the flawed
connection, arriving immediately or several minutes
later. It might present itself as a beholder to ignorant
creatures in an attempt to intimidate them, or as a
spectator to its summoner in order to drain magic
items it is expected to guard.
A beholder (see the Monster Manual} usually
drives away or kills any gauths that enter its terri­
tory, but it might choose to force them to serve it as
lieutenants. Gauths are less xenophobic than be­
holders, so they might form small clusters and work
together, though they’re just as likely to ignore each
other entirely.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 133

=== PAGE 134 ===
Gazer
A gazer is a tiny manifestation of the dreams of a
beholder. It resembles the beholder who dreamed it
into existence, but its body is only 8 inches wide and
it has only four eyestalks. It follows its creator like
a devoted, aggressive puppy, and sometimes small
packs of these creatures patrol their master’s lair
for vermin to kill and lone creatures to harass.
A gazer can’t speak any languages but can ap­
proximate words and sentences it hears, mimicking
them in a high-pitched, mocking manner. Beholders
find gazers amusing and tolerate their presence like
spoiled pets. Some beholders with wizard minions
insist they take a gazer as a familiar because the be­
holders can see through the eyes of these creatures.
A wild gazer (one living separately from a be­
holder) is territorial, eats bugs and little animals,
and is known for playing with its food. A lone wild
gazer avoids picking fights with creatures that are
Medium or larger, but a pack of them might take on
larger prey. A gazer might follow the folk in its ter­
ritory, noisily mimicking their speech and generally
being a nuisance, until they leave the area, but it
flees if confronted by something it can’t kill.
VARIANT: GAZER FAMILIAR
Spellcasters who are interested in unusual familiars
find that gazers are eager to serve someone who
has magical power. Unless its master is strict, a
gazer familiar can be unruly, behaving aggressively
toward other Tiny creatures. A gazer serving as a
familiar has the following trait:
Familiar. The gazer can serve another creature as a familiar,
forming a telepathic bond with its willing master, provided that
the master is at least a 3rd-level spellcaster. While the two are
bonded, the master can sense what the gazer senses as long as
they are within 1 mile of each other. If its master causes it phys­
ical harm, the gazer will end its service as a familiar, breaking
the telepathic bond.
134 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Gazer
Tiny Aberration (Beholder), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 13 (3d4 + 6)
Speed 0 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
3 (-4) 17 (+3) 14 (+2) 3 (-4) 10 (+0) 7 (-2)
Saving Throws Wis +2
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +5
Condition Immunities prone
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Mimicry. The gazer can mimic simple sounds of speech it has
heard, in any language. A creature that hears the sounds can
tell they are imitations with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (In­
­ sight) check.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.
Eye Rays. The gazer shoots two of the following magical eye
rays at random (roll two d4s, and reroll duplicates), choosing
one or two targets it can see within 60 feet of it:
1: Dazing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 12
Wisdom saving throw or be charmed until the start of the
gazer’s next turn. While the target is charmed in this way, its
speed is halved, and it has disadvantage on attack rolls.
2: Fear Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 12
Wisdom saving throw or be frightened until the start of the
gazer’s next turn.
s
3: Frost Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 12 Dexterity sav­
ing throw or take 10 (3d6) cold damage.
4: Telekinetic Ray. If the target is a creature that is Medium or
smaller, it must succeed on a DC 12 Strength saving throw
or be moved up to 30 feet directly away from the gazer. If the
target is a Tiny object that isn't being worn or carried, the
gazer moves it up to 30 feet in any direction. The gazer can
also exert fine control on objects with this ray, such as ma­
nipulating a simple tool or opening a container.
Bonus Actions
­ Aggressive. The gazer moves up to its speed toward a hostile
creature that it can see.

=== PAGE 135 ===
Geryon
Geryon is locked in an endless struggle with Levis-
tus for control of Stygia. The two have fought for
centuries, each displacing the other innumerable
times. Currently, Levistus claims lordship over Sty­
gia, but he has been trapped in an enormous block
of ice at the command of Asmodeus. In response,
Geryon is marshaling his followers, hoping to use
this opportunity to replace his hated rival.
Among the archdevils, Geryon is known for his
martial prowess. He is a ferocious hunter and a re­
lentless tracker. He often joins his troops in battle;
he loves to feel flesh and steel sundered beneath
his claws and to taste his foes’ blood. Yet Geryon’s
ferocity has also limited his ability to collect souls
and forge an effective hierarchy. Sages who study
the Nine Hells believe the battle for control of Stygia
is a test staged by Asmodeus in hopes of purging the
worst impulses from both Geryon and Levistus—or
discovering a competent replacement for both.
--col--
Geryo i£s Lair
Geryon has recently reclaimed his ancient fortress,
Coldsteel, a sprawling complex that rises from the
icy center of Stygia. He roams the passages, spitting
oaths of vengeance against Asmodeus and hatching
schemes to reclaim his standing from Levistus.
The challenge rating of Geryon is 23 (50,000 XP)
when he’s encountered in his lair.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), Geryon
can take one of the following lair actions; he can’t
take the same lair action two rounds in a row:
Banish. Geryon casts the banishment spell.
Chill Blast. Geryon causes a blast of cold to burst
from the ground at a point he can see within 120
feet of him. The cold fills a cube, 10 feet on each
side, centered on that point. Each creature in that
area must succeed on a DC 21 Constitution saving
throw or take 28 (8d6) cold damage.
Hateful Restraints. Geryon targets one creature
he can see within 60 feet of him. The target must
succeed on a DC 21 Wisdom saving throw or be-
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 135

=== PAGE 136 ===
come restrained for 1 minute. The target can end
the effect on itself if it deals any damage to one or
more of its allies.
Regional Effects
The region containing Geryon’s lair is warped by his
magic, creating one or more of the following effects:
Chilling Wind. Freezing strong winds howl around
the area within 1 mile of the lair.
Enervating Screams. Howls and screams fill the
air within 1 mile of the lair. Any creature that
finishes a short or long rest in this area must suc­
ceed on a DC 21 Wisdom saving throw or derive
no benefit from the rest.
Hellish Doorways. Sapient creatures within 1 mile
of the lair frequently see shimmering portals lead­
ing to places they consider safe. Passing through
a portal always deposits a traveler somewhere
in Stygia.
If Geryon dies, these effects fade over the course of
Id 10 days.
Geryon
Huge Fiend (Devil), Lawful Evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 300 (24dl2+ 144)
Speed 30 ft., fly 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
29 (+9) 17 (+3) 22 (+6) 19 (+4) 16 (+3) 23 (+6)
Saving Throws Dex +10, Con +13, Wis +10, Cha +13
Skills Deception +13, Intimidation +13, Perception +10
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities cold, fire, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 20
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 22 (41,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Geryon fails a saving throw, he
can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Geryon has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Regeneration. Geryon regains 20 hit points at the start of his
turn. If he takes radiant damage, this trait doesn’t function at
the start of his next turn. Geryon dies only if he starts his turn
with 0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate.
Actions
Multiattack. Geryon makes one Claw attack and one
Stinger attack.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 23 (4d6 + 9) cold damage. If the target is Large or smaller,
136 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Cultists of Geryon
Geryon grants his cultists special abilities. Members
of his cult can gain the Crushing Blow trait. Cult
leaders can also gain the Indomitable Strength trait.
Crushing Blow (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). As a bo­
nus action, the creature gains a bonus to the damage roll of its
next melee weapon attack roll that hits within the next minute.
The bonus equals its Strength modifier (minimum of+1).
Indomitable Strength (Recharge 5-6). As a reaction when this
creature takes damage, it can roll a diO and subtract the num­
ber rolled from the damage.
VARIANT: SOUND THE HORN
Geryon can have an action that allows him to sum­
mon minotaurs.
Sound the Horn (1/Day). Geryon blows his horn, which causes
5d4 minotaurs (see the Monster Manual) to appear in unoccu­
pied spaces of his choice within 600 feet of him. The minotaurs
roll initiative when they appear, and they obey his commands.
They remain until they die or Geryon uses an action to dismiss
any or all of them.
it is grappled (DC 24), and it is restrained until the grapple
ends. Geryon can grapple one creature at a time. If the target is
already grappled by Geryon, the target takes an extra 27 (6d8)
cold damage.
Stinger. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 20 ft., one
creature. Hit: 14 (2d4 + 9) force damage, and the target must
succeed on a DC 21 Constitution saving throw or take 13 (2dl2)
poison damage and become poisoned until it finishes a short
or long rest. The target’s hit point maximum is reduced by an
amount equal to half the poison damage taken. This reduction
lasts until the poisoned condition is removed. The target dies if
its hit point maximum is reduced to 0.
Spellcasting. Geryon casts one of the following spells, requiring
no material components and using Charisma as the spellcast­
ing ability (spell save DC 21):
At will: alter self (can become Medium when changing his
appearance), detect magic, ice storm, invisibility (self only),
locate object, suggestion, wall of ice
1/day: banishment
Teleport. Geryon teleports, along with any equipment he is
wearing and carrying, up to 120 feet to an unoccupied space
he can see.
Legendary Actions
Geryon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op­
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at
a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Geryon
regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn.
Infernal Glare. Geryon targets one creature he can see within
60 feet of him. The target must succeed on a DC 23 Wisdom
saving throw or become frightened of Geryon until the end of
its next turn.
Teleport. Geryon uses Teleport.
Swift Sting (Costs 2 Actions). Geryon makes one Stinger attack.

=== PAGE 137 ===
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 22 (3dl0 + 6)
Speed 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 13 (+1) 14 (+2) 4 (-3) 12 (+1) 6 (-2)
Damage Immunities fire
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Fire Absorption. Whenever the giant strider is subjected to fire
damage, it takes no damage and regains a number of hit points
equal to half the fire damage dealt.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (1 d8 + 4) piercing damage.
Fire Burst (Recharge 5-6). The giant strider hurls a gout of
flame at a point it can see within 60 feet of it. Each creature in
a 10-foot-radius sphere centered on that point must make a
DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 14 (4d6) fire damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. The
fire spreads around corners, and it ignites flammable objects in
that area that aren’t being worn or carried.
--col--
Giant Strider
These fierce and majestic monsters exhibit attri­
butes of both birds and reptiles, but are truly nei­
ther. Giant striders have a supernatural affinity to
fire and can spit gouts of flame at distant enemies.
They are most often found in tropical, volcani­
cally active areas or regions that similarly provide
sources of both water and extreme heat.
Firenewts prize giant striders and seek to adopt
them whenever possible. They provide for stables of
these creatures in their lairs, and in return, the gi­
ant striders voluntarily serve as mounts for firenewt
warriors (in this book).
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 137

=== PAGE 138 ===
Giff
Medium Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 16 (breastplate)
Hit Points 60 (8d8 + 24)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 14 (+2) 17 (+3) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 12 (+1)
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages Common
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Firearms Knowledge. The giff’s mastery of its weapons enables
it to ignore the loading property of muskets and pistols.
Headfirst Charge. The giff can try to knock a creature over;
if the giff moves at least 20 feet in a straight line and ends
within 5 feet of a Large or smaller creature, that creature must
succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or take 7 (2d6) blud­
geoning damage and be knocked prone.
Actions________________________________
Multiattack. The giff makes two Longsword, Musket, or Pis­
tol attacks.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 8 (1 d8 + 4) slashing damage, or 9 (IdlO + 4) slashing
damage if used with two hands.
Musket. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 40/120 ft., one
target. Hit: 8 (1 dl2 + 2) piercing damage.
Pistol. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/90 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (IdlO + 2) piercing damage.
Fragmentation Grenade (1/Day). The giff throws a grenade up
to 60 feet, and the grenade explodes in a 20-foot-radius sphere.
Each creature in that area must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving
throw, taking 17 (5d6) piercing damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one.
>38 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Giff
It’s easy to spot giff in a room: these burly folk are
7-foot-tall, hippopotamus-headed people. In Wild­
space and the associated ports, giff are most often
encountered as spacefaring mercenaries. These
troops are renowned for their martial training and
love of explosives and are typically armed with
gleaming pistols and muskets. The stat block here
represents one of those mercenaries.
Every aspect of these spacefaring giff’s society
is organized along military lines. From birth until
death, each has a military rank. Promotions don’t
depend on age but are granted by a superior as a re­
ward for valor.
Muskets and grenades are the specialties of many
giff regiments. The bigger the boom, the brighter
the flash, and the thicker the smoke it produces, the
greater the glory for the one wielding the weapon.
Giff mercenaries have been known to accept pay­
ment in kegs of gunpowder in preference to gold,
gems, or other currency.
Gunpowder by the Keg
In addition to their personal gunpowder weapons,
giff ships and mercenary companies carry spare
gunpowder in kegs. In an emergency, or if a large
explosion is needed, a whole keg can be detonated.
A giff lights the fuse on the keg and can then throw
the keg up to 15 feet as part of the same action. The
keg explodes at the start of the giff’s next turn. Each
creature within 20 feet of the exploding keg must
make a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed
save, a creature takes 24 (7d6) fire damage and is
knocked prone. On a successful save, a creature
takes half as much damage and isn’t knocked prone.
Every other keg of gunpowder within 20 feet of
an exploding keg has a 50 percent chance of also
exploding. Check each keg only once per turn, no
matter how many other kegs explode around it.

=== PAGE 139 ===
i...■; - ............ . .....—-------■=.
Girallon
Large Monstrosity, Unaligned
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 59 (7dl0 + 21)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 16 (+3) 16 (+3) 5 (-3) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages —
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions_______________________________
Multiattack. The girallon makes one Bite attack and four
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 7 (1 d6 + 4) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (1 d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Bonus Actions
Aggressive. The girallon moves up to its speed toward a hostile
creature that it can see.
--col--
Girallon
A girallon looks like an oversized, four-armed ape
with grayish-tan skin and white fur. Its vicious fangs
and claws reveal it to be a monstrous predator.
Girallons are most common in temperate or warm
forest environments abundant with life. They share
apes’ adeptness at climbing, although few trees can
support the weight of these half-ton creatures. The
ruins of cities, especially those found in deep forests
and jungles, seem to attract girallons. They see a
city’s buildings as a superior sort of forest whose
uppermost “branches” can safely support them. The
creatures can easily scale walls and battlements,
and they perch on tower tops and other high van­
tages to keep an eye on the surrounding area.
When girallons can’t climb, they stalk the forest
floor, lurk in narrow ravines or shallow caves, or
hide in ruined sites while waiting for prey to come
near. A girallon is surprisingly stealthy, considering
its size and its lack of camouflage.
Girallons form loose bands of several individuals
and their offspring, usually led by a dominant adult
that also tends to be the oldest member of the group.
When on the hunt away from their lair, girallons
use roars and body language to communicate with
one another over distance. Each individual typically
hunts alone and widely separated from the others
to ensure that everyone gets adequate fodder. The
leader might organize members to work together to
make a big kill, however. If they succeed, everyone
in the group shares the spoils, with the best parts
going to those caring for their young.
Girallons’ strange appearance and attraction
to ruins lead sages to believe they were created
through magic to serve as guardians for some lost
empire. When that empire fell ages ago, girallons
turned feral and spread out across the world.
Numerous creatures have tried to tame, subju­
gate, or cooperate with the monsters. For instance,
some forest-dwelling peoples capture girallons and
train them to serve as sentinels. Recognizing that
girallons are peaceful among their own kind, other
folk have learned how to approach a group’s leader,
offering food and other gifts in hopes of establishing
an alliance with the creatures.
Girallons that are well treated might be willing to
serve as guards, though they lack the intelligence
to take on tasks more complicated than attacking
strangers who enter their domain. A girallon that’s
captured when young and carefully trained could
end up in a seemingly unlikely place, such as guard­
ing the entrance to a city’s thieves’ guild. Those who
would keep a girallon must always be wary, how­
ever, because the creature could revert to its preda­
tory nature at any time.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY I39

=== PAGE 140 ===
Githyanki
Githyanki descend from an ancient people who
were also the progenitors of githzerai (also in this
book). These tall, gaunt folk have potent psionic
powers and dwell, for the most part, on the Astral
Plane. Among the best-known githyanki are the
bellicose followers of the Lich Queen Vlaakith. They
terrorize the Astral Plane, raiding into other planes
to plunder the multiverse of its magic and riches.
Githyanki Gish
Gish blend their magical abilities with swordplay to
become dangerous foes in battle. Their specialized
capabilities make them well suited for assassina­
tion, raiding, and espionage.
Githyanki Gish
Medium Humanoid (Cith, Wizard), Any Alignment
Armor Class 17 (half plate)
Hit Points 130 (20d8 4-40)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 15(+2) 14(4-2) 16(4-3) 15(4-2) 16(4-3)
Saving Throws Con 4-6, Int 4-7, Wis 4-6
Skills Insight 4-6, Perception 4-6, Stealth 4-6
Senses passive Perception 16
Languages Gith
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus 4-4
Actions
Multiattack. The githyanki makes three Longsword or Teleki­
netic Bolt attacks, or it makes one of those attacks and uses
Spellcasting.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 7 (ld8 4- 3) slashing damage, or 8 (IdlO 4- 3) slashing
damage if used with two hands, plus 22 (5d8) psychic damage.
Telekinetic Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +7 to hit, range 120 ft.,
one target. Hit: 28 (8d6) force damage.
