its turn within 30 feet of the alkilith must succeed on a DC 18
Wisdom saving throw, or it hears a faint buzzing in its head for
a moment and has disadvantage on its next attack roll, saving
throw, or ability check.
If the saving throw against Foment Confusion fails by 5 or
more, the creature is instead subjected to the confusion spell
for 1 minute (no concentration required by the alkilith). While
under the effect of that confusion, the creature is immune to
­ Foment Confusion.
Magic Resistance. The alkilith has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Spider Climb. The alkilith can climb difficult surfaces, such as
upside down on ceilings, without making an ability check.
Unusual Nature. The alkilith doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The alkilith makes three Tentacle attacks.
Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 18 (4d6 + 4) acid damage.
.............. .......~....................... • , '-r.' "" 1 . i

=== PAGE 45 ===
Allip
When a creature uncovers a secret that a powerful
being has protected with a mighty curse, the result
is often the creation of an allip. Secrets protected
in this manner range in scope from a demon lord’s
true name to the hidden truths of the cosmic order.
The creature acquires the secret, but the curse an­
nihilates its body and leaves behind a spectral being
composed of fragments from the victim’s psyche
and overwhelming psychic agony.
Every allip is wracked with a horrifying insight
that torments what remains of its mind. In the pres­
ence of other creatures, an allip seeks to relieve this
burden by sharing its secret. The creature can im­
part only a shard of the knowledge that doomed it,
but that piece is enough to wrack the recipient with
temporary mental anguish and violent compulsions.
The survivors of an allip’s attack are sometimes
left with a compulsion to learn more about what
spawned this monstrosity. Strange phrases echo
through their minds, and weird visions occupy their
dreams. The sense that some colossal truth sits just
outside their recall plagues them for days, months,
and sometimes years after their fateful encounter.
--col--
Insidious Lore
An allip might attempt to share its lore to escape its
curse and enter the afterlife. It can transfer knowl­
edge from its mind by guiding another creature to
write down what it knows. This process takes days
or possibly weeks. An allip can accomplish this task
by lurking in the study or workplace of a scholar. If
the allip remains hidden, its victim is gradually over­
come by frantic energy. A scholar, driven by sudden
insights to work night and day, produces reams of
text with little memory of exactly what the docu­
ments contain. If the allip succeeds, it passes from
the world—and its terrible secret hides somewhere
in the scholar’s text, waiting to be discovered by its
next victim.
Allip
Medium Undead, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 40 (9d8)
Speed 0 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
6 (-2) 17 (+3) 10 (+0) 17 (+3) 15 (+2) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws I nt +6, Wis +5
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +6
Damage Resistances acid, fire, lightning, thunder; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities cold, necrotic, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Incorporeal Movement. The allip can move through other
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5
(IdlO) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object.
Unusual Nature. The allip doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Maddening Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 17 (4d6 + 3) psychic damage.
Howling Babble (Recharge 6). Each creature within 30 feet of
the allip that can hear it must make a DC 14 Wisdom saving
throw. On a failed save, a target takes 12 (2d8 + 3) psychic
damage, and it is stunned until the end of its next turn. On
a successful save, it takes half as much damage and isn't
stunned. Constructs and Undead are immune to this effect.
Whispers of Compulsion. The allip chooses up to three crea­
tures it can see within 60 feet of it. Each target must succeed
on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw, or it takes 12 (2d8 + 3)
psychic damage and must use its reaction to make a melee
weapon attack against one creature of the allip’s choice that the
allip can see. Constructs and Undead are immune to this effect.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 45

=== PAGE 46 ===
Amnizu
Medium Fiend (Devil), Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 21 (natural armor)
Hit Points 202 (27d8 + 81)
Speed 30 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
11 (+0) 13 (+1) 16 (+3) 20 (+5) 12 (+1) 18 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +9, Wis +7, Cha +10
Skills Perception +7
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages Common, Infernal, telepathy 1,000 ft.
Challenge 18 (20,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +6
Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the amnizu’s
darkvision.
Magic Resistance. The amnizu has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The amnizu uses Blinding Rot or Forgetfulness, if
available. It also makes two Taskmaster Whip attacks.
Taskmaster Whip. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10
ft., one target. Hit: 9 (1 d8 + 5) slashing damage plus 16 (3dl0)
force damage.
46 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Amnizu
Amnizus lead infernal legions into battle and
command guardians at the gateways to the Hells.
Amnizus are arrogant, bullying, and ruthless, but
they’re also highly intelligent tacticians and unfail­
ingly loyal—qualities the hellish archdukes value.
Some amnizus perform the critical task of watch­
ing over the River Styx from fortresses along the
river’s blighted banks, where it flows through Dis
and Stygia. They collect the souls arriving in the
form of lemures (see the Monster Manual). Lemures
have no personalities or memories; they’re driven
only by the desire to commit evil. The amnizus that
patrol here drill the rules of the Nine Hells into the
new arrivals’ minds and marshal them into legions.
VARIANT: DEVIL SUMMONING
Some amnizus have an action that allows them to
summon other devils:
Summon Devil (1/Day). The amnizu summons 2d4 bearded
devils or 1 d4 barbed devils (both appear in the Monster Man­
ual). A summoned devil appears in an unoccupied space within
60 feet of the amnizu, acts as an ally of the amnizu, and can’t
summon other devils. It remains for 1 minute, until the amnizu
dies, or until its summoner dismisses it as an action.
Blinding Rot. The amnizu targets one or two creatures that it
can see within 60 feet of it. Each target must succeed on a DC
19 Wisdom saving throw or take 26 (4dl2) necrotic damage and
be blinded until the start of the amnizu’s next turn.
Forgetfulness (Recharge 6). The amnizu targets one creature
it can see within 60 feet of it. That creature must succeed on
a DC 18 Intelligence saving throw or take 26 (4d 12) psychic
damage and become stunned for 1 minute. A stunned creature
repeats the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending
the effect on itself on a success. If the target is stunned for the
full minute, it forgets everything it sensed, experienced, and
learned during the last 5 hours.
Spellcasting. The amnizu casts one of the following spells, re­
quiring no material components and using Intelligence as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 19):
At will: command
3/day: dominate monster
l/day.feeblemind
Reactions
Instinctive Charm. When a creature within 60 feet of the am­
nizu makes an attack roll against it, and another creature is
within the attack’s range, the attacker must make a DC 19
Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the attacker must
target the creature that is closest to it, not including the am­
nizu or itself. If multiple creatures are closest, the attacker
chooses which one to target. If the saving throw is successful,
the attacker is immune to the amnizu's Instinctive Charm
for 24 hours.

=== PAGE 47 ===
Annis Hag
Annis hags lair in mountains or hills. These hunch­
backed and hump-shouldered hags are the largest
and most physically imposing of their kind, standing
eight feet tall. They can easily tear a fully grown
person apart, but they love hunting the young, pre­
ferring their flesh above all others.
Annis hags leave tokens of their cruelty at the
edges of forests and other areas they claim to pro­
voke fear and distrust in nearby villages and set­
tlements. To an annis hag, nothing is sweeter than
making a once-vibrant community paralyzed with
terror, so folk never venture out at night, strangers
are met with suspicion and anger, and parents warn
their children: “Be good, or the annis will get you.”
When an annis feels especially cruel, the hag
adopts the appearance of a kindly elder, approaches
a child in a remote place, and gives them an iron to­
ken (described below), through which the child can
magically confide in the hag. Over time, “Granny”
or “Grampy” convinces the child that it’s okay to do
bad deeds—starting with breaking things or wan­
dering without permission, then graduating to push­
ing someone down the stairs or setting a house on
fire. Eventually, the child’s terrified family and com­
munity face painful decisions of what to do about
the seemingly remorseless child.
Much as annis hags befriend children in order
to corrupt them, they may adopt a group of ogres,
trolls, or other creatures (ogres and trolls appear
in the Monster Manual}, ruling them through brute
strength, insults, and superstition.
Iron Token
An annis hag can pull out one of their iron teeth or
nails and spend 1 minute shaping and polishing
it into the form of a coin, a ring, or a tiny mirror.
Thereafter, any creature that holds this iron token
can have a whispered conversation with the hag,
provided the creature and the hag are within 10
miles of each other. When the hag speaks through
the token, the holder can hear the hag’s whisper but
not any other sounds at the hag’s location. Similarly,
the hag can hear the holder of the token but not the
noise around it.
A hag can have up to three iron tokens active at
one time. As an action, the hag can discern the
direction and approximate distance to those active
tokens. The hag can deactivate any of those tokens
at any distance (no action required), whereupon the
token retains its current form but loses its magic.
Hag Covens
An annis hag that is part of a coven (see the “Hag
Covens” sidebar in the Monster Manual} has a chal­
lenge rating of 8 (3,900 XP).
--col--
Annis Hag
Large Fey, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 90 (12dl0 + 24)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
21 (+5) 12 (+1) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 14 (+2) 15 (+2)
Saving Throws Con +5
Skills Deception +5, Perception +5
Damage Resistances cold
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Common, Giant, Sylvan
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Actions
Multiattack. The annis makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (3d6 + 5) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (3d6 + 5) slashing damage.
Crushing Hug. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 36 (9d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 15) if it is a Large or smaller creature. Un­
til the grapple ends, the target takes 36 (9d6 + 5) bludgeoning
damage at the start of each of the hag’s turns. The hag can’t
make attacks while grappling a creature in this way.
Spellcasting. The hag casts one of the following spells, using
Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 13):
3/day each: disguise self (including the form of a Medium Hu­
manoid), Jog cloud
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 47

=== PAGE 48 ===
Archdruid
Archdruids watch over the natural wonders of
their domains. They seldom interact with folk away
from their druid groves and shrines, unless there
is a great threat to the natural order or to a nearby
community. An archdruid typically has one or more
pupils who are druids (see the Monster Manual),
and the archdruid’s lair is usually guarded by loyal
Beasts and Fey creatures.
When an archdruid uses their Change Shape
action, you may choose the creature they turn into,
abiding by the action’s restrictions. Or you may roll
on the Archdruid Favored Shapes table to deter­
mine the form the archdruid adopts. These crea­
tures appear in the Monster Manual, unless other­
wise noted.
Archdruid Favored Shapes
d8 Favored Shape
1 Air elemental
2 Earth elemental
3 Fire elemental
4 Giant crocodile
5 Mammoth
6 Flail snail (appears in this book)
7 Triceratops
8 Water elemental
48 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
—
Arghdruid
Medium Humanoid (Druid), Any Alignment
Armor Class 14 (hide armor)
g Hit Points 154 (28d8 + 28)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 12 (+1) 20 (+5) 11 (+0)
Saving Throws I nt +5, Wis +9
Skills Medicine +9, Nature +5, Perception +9
Senses passive Perception 19
H Languages Druidic plus any two languages
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Actions
Multiattack. The archdruid makes three Staff or Wildfire at­
tacks. It can replace one attack with a use of Spellcasting.
Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 21 (6d6) poi­
son damage.
Wildfire. Ranged Spell Attack: +9 to hit, range 120 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 26 (6d6 + 5) fire damage, and the target is blinded
until the start of the druid’s next turn.
Spellcasting. The archdruid casts one of the following spells,
using Wisdom as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 17):
At will: beast sense, entangle, speak with animals
3/day each: animal messenger, dominate beast, faerie f re,
tree stride
1/day each: commune with nature (as an action), mass
cure wounds
Bonus Actions
Change Shape (2/Day). The archdruid magically transforms
into a Beast or an Elemental with a challenge rating of 6 or less
and can remain in that form for up to 9 hours. The archdruid
can choose whether its equipment falls to the ground, melds
with its new form, or is worn by the new form. The archdruid
reverts to its true form if it dies or falls unconscious. The arch­
druid can revert to its true form using a bonus action.
While in a new form, the archdruid's stat block is replaced
by the stat block of that form, except the archdruid keeps its
current hit points, its hit point maximum, this bonus action, its
languages and ability to speak, and its Spellcasting action.
The new form’s attacks count as magical for the purpose of
overcoming resistances and immunity to nonmagical attacks.
....:. .... ................ . .......... • ... ___

=== PAGE 49 ===
Archer
Archers defend castles, hunt wild game on the
fringes of civilization, serve as artillery in military
units, and occasionally make good coin as brigands
or caravan guards.
Some renowned archers and groups of archers
are known for the special fletching of their arrows.
You may roll on the Archer Fletching table to deter­
mine the distinctive fletching used by an individual
archer or a group of them.
Archer Fletching
d!2 Fletching
1 Feathers from an owlbear’s mane
2 Cockatrice feathers
3 Axe beak feathers
4 Planetar feathers
5 Couatl feathers
6 Pegasus feathers
7 Griffon feathers
8 Vrock feathers
9 Peryton feathers
10 Dryad leaf vanes
11 Drake scale vanes
12 Stirge wing vanes
--col--
Archer
Medium Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 16 (studded leather)
Hit Points 75 (10d8 + 30)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
11 (+0) 18 (+4) 16 (+3) 11 (+0) 13 (+1) 10 (+0)
Skills Acrobatics +6, Perception +5
Senses passive Perception 15
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions
Multiattack. The archer makes two Shortsword or Long­
bow attacks.
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (1 d6 + 4) piercing damage.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 150/600 ft.,
one target. Hit: 8 (1 d8 + 4) piercing damage.
Bonus Actions
Archer’s Eye (3/Day). Immediately after making an attack roll or
a damage roll with a ranged weapon, the archer can roll a diO
and add the number rolled to the total.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY

=== PAGE 50 ===
Armanite
Great herds of armanites race across the blasted
fields of the Abyss, bent on slaughter and death,
driven by unrestrained bloodlust. Whether they’re
controlled by more powerful demons or charging
into battle for the sake of it, armanites use their
claws and hooves, as well as their long, whiplike
tails, to tear apart foes.
In the armies of demon lords, armanites perform
the role of heavy cavalry, leading the charge and
tearing into their enemies’ flanks. Armanites fight
all the time—even battling each other if they can’t
find another enemy. They make ideal shock troops,
utterly ruthless and bold to the point of stupidity.
Part of what makes armanites so fearsome is
the number of weapons they have at their disposal.
They possess dense hooves, claws that end in curl­
ing talons, and long tails whose serrated ridges can
flense the flesh from a victim, and they use them all
to carve through their foes. When they’re up against
tough formations, they can call on their innate
magic to loose bolts of lightning and blow holes in
enemy ranks.
50 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Armanite
Large Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 94 (9dl0 + 45)
Speed 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
21 (+5) 18 (+4) 21 (+5) 8(-l) 12 (+1) 13 (+1)
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Magic Resistance. The armanite has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The armanite makes one Claw attack, one Hooves
attack, and one Serrated Tail attack.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 10 (2d4 + 5) slashing damage plus 9 (2d8) light­
ning damage.
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a Large
or smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 16 Strength saving
throw or be knocked prone.
Serrated Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 16 (2dl0 + 5) slashing damage.
Lightning Lance (Recharge 5-6). The armanite looses a bolt of
lightning in a line that is 60 feet long and 10 feet wide. Each
creature in the line must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw,
taking 36 (8d8) lightning damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one.

=== PAGE 51 ===
Astral Dreadnought
Enormous and terrifying, astral dreadnoughts haunt
the silvery void of the Astral Plane, causing planar
travelers to shudder at the very thought of them.
Dreadnoughts have been gliding through the astral
mists since the dawn of the multiverse, trying to de­
vour all other creatures they encounter.
Covered from head to tail in layers of thick, spiked
plates, a dreadnought has two gnarled limbs that
end in magic-enhanced pincer claws. Constellations
appear to swirl in the depths of its single eye, and
its serpentine tail trails off into the silvery void.
Anything it swallows is deposited in a unique demi­
plane—an enclosed space that contains eons worth
of detritus, as well as the remains of travelers. The
place has gravity and breathable air, and organic
matter decays there. When the dreadnought dies, its
demiplane vanishes, and its contents are released
into the Astral Plane.
Astral Dreadnought
Gargantuan Monstrosity (Titan), Unaligned
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 297 (17d20+ 119)
Speed 15 ft., fly 80 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
28 (+9) 7 (-2) 25 (+7) 5 H) 14 (+2) 18 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Wis +9
Skills Perception +9
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical attacks
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, stunned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 19
Languages —
Challenge 21 (33,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
Antimagic Cone. The dreadnought’s eye creates an area of anti­
magic, as in the antimagic field spell, in a 150-foot cone. At the
start of each of its turns, it decides which way the cone faces.
The cone doesn’t function while the eye is closed or while the
dreadnought is blinded.
Astral Entity. The dreadnought can’t leave the Astral Plane, nor
can it be banished or otherwise transported out of that plane.
Demiplanar Donjon. Anything the dreadnought swallows is
transported to a demiplane that can be entered by no other
means except a wish spell or the dreadnought’s Bite and Don­
