quicklings constantly pace and shift in place, as
though they can’t wait to be off again.
Quicklings have a capricious nature that goes
well with their energy level: they think as fast as
they run, and they are always up to something.
They spend most of their time perpetrating acts of
mischief on slower creatures. One rarely passes up
an opportunity to tie a person’s bootlaces together,
move the stool a creature is about to sit on, or un­
buckle a saddle while no one’s looking.
Tricks of that sort are hardly the limit of quick­
lings’ artful malice, however. They don’t commit
outright murder, but they can ruin lives in plenty
of other ways: stealing an important letter, swiping
coins collected for the poor, planting a stolen item
in someone’s bag. Quicklings enjoy causing suffer­
ing that transcends mere mischief, especially when
the blame for their actions falls on others and cre­
ates discord.
--col--
Quickling
Tiny Fey, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 16
Hit Points 10 (3d4+3)
Speed 120 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
4 (-3) 23 (+6) 13(+1) 10(4-0) 12(4-1) 7 (-2)
Skills Acrobatics 4-8, Sleight of Hand 4-8, Stealth 4-8,
Perception 4-5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Common, Sylvan
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Blurred Movement. Attack rolls against the quickling have dis­
advantage unless it is incapacitated or its speed is 0.
Evasion. If the quickling is subjected to an effect that allows it
to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, it
instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving throw and
only half damage if it fails, provided it isn’t incapacitated.
Actions
Multiattack. The quickling makes three Dagger attacks.
Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: 4-8 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 8 (1 d4 4- 6) piercing damage.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 207

=== PAGE 208 ===
Redcap
A redcap is a homicidal Fey creature born of blood
lust. Redcaps, although small, have formidable
strength, which they use to hunt and kill without
hesitation or regret.
In the Feywild, or where that plane touches
the material world at a fey crossing, if a
sentient creature acts on an intense desire
for bloodshed, one or more redcaps might
appear where the blood of a slain person
soaks the ground. At first, new redcaps look
like tiny bloodstained mushrooms just push­
ing their caps out of the soil. When moonlight
shines on one of these caps, a creature that
resembles a wizened and undersized gnome with
a hunched back and a sinewy frame springs from
the earth. The creature has a pointed leather cap,
clothing of similar material, heavy iron boots, and
a heavy bladed weapon. From the moment redcaps
awaken, they desire only murder and carnage, and
they constantly seek to satisfy these cravings.
Redcaps lack subtlety. They live for direct con­
frontation and the mayhem of mortal combat. Even
if a redcap wanted to be stealthy, the creature’s
iron boots force them to take ponderous, thunder­
ous steps. When a redcap is near potential prey,
though, they can close the distance quickly and get
in a vicious swing of their weapon before the target
can react.
Redcaps’ desire to slay is rooted in their will to
survive. To sustain their unnatural existence, they
must soak their hats in the fresh blood of their vic­
tims. When redcaps are born, their hats are coated
with wet blood, and they know that if the blood isn’t
replenished at least once every three days, they will
vanish as if they had never been.
Some redcaps can sense the being whose murder­
ous acts led to their birth. They typically use this in­
nate connection to find their creator and make that
creature their first victim, though they might instead
seek out their maker to enjoy proximity to a kindred
spirit. Although redcaps don’t usually operate in
groups, an individual responsible for the creation
of multiple redcaps at the same site could attract
the entire group to serve as cohorts, emulating that
individual’s murderous handiwork. Some hags and
wicked mages know methods to call redcaps out of
the Feywild and might likewise put teams of them
to work as grisly servants.
In any case, if a redcap works with another being,
the redcap demands to be paid in victims. A patron
who tries to stifle a redcap’s natural and neces­
sary urge for blood risks becoming the redcap’s
next target.
208 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Redcap
Small Fey, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 45 (6d6 + 24)
Speed 25 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 13 (+1) 18 (+4) 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 9 (-1)
Skills Athletics +6, Perception +3
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Common, Sylvan
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Iron Boots. The redcap has disadvantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks.
Outsize Strength. While grappling, the redcap is considered
to be Medium. Also, wielding a heavy weapon doesn’t impose
disadvantage on its attack rolls.
Actions
Multiattack. The redcap makes three Wicked Sickle attacks.
Wicked Sickle. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) slashing damage.
Ironbound Pursuit. The redcap moves up to its speed to a crea­
ture it can see and kicks with its iron boots. The target must
succeed on a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw or take 20 (3dl0 +
4) bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone.

=== PAGE 209 ===
Retriever
The retriever is a potent, spider-like Con­
struct conceived and built by Underdark fol­
lowers of Lolth for one original purpose—to
prowl the Abyss and capture demons for
these cultists to enslave or use in their rituals.
The automatons proved so effective and so
fearsome that they now perform many differ­
ent missions.
Though retrievers were created to operate
only in the Abyss, they are sometimes dis­
patched when a powerful devotee of Lolth
needs some creature or object captured and
brought back alive and intact. Only under the
rarest of circumstances is a retriever handed
over or sold to others, since Lolth’s cultists
don’t want to take the chance that their cre­
ations will be turned against them.
Retriever
Large Construct, Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 210 (20dl0+ 100)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
22 (+6) 16 (+3) 20 (+5) 3 (-4) 11 (+0) 4 (-3)
Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +10, Wis +5
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +8
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison, psychic; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks that aren’t
adamantine
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages understands Abyssal, Elvish, and Undercommon
but can’t speak
Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Faultless Tracker. The retriever is given a quarry by its master.
The quarry can be a specific creature or object the master is
personally acquainted with, or it can be a general type of crea­
ture or object the master has seen before. The retriever knows
the direction and distance to its quarry as long as the two of
them are on the same plane of existence. The retriever can have
I . ■ ■ =
--col--
only one such quarry at a time. The retriever also always knows
the location of its master.
Actions
Multiattack. The retriever makes two Foreleg attacks, and it
uses Force Beam or Paralyzing Beam, if available.
Foreleg. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) slashing damage.
Force Beam. The retriever targets one creature it can see within
60 feet of it. The target must make a DC 16 Dexterity saving
throw, taking 27 (5dl0) force damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one.
Paralyzing Beam (Recharge 5-6). The retriever targets one
creature it can see within 60 feet of it. The target must suc­
ceed on a DC 18 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for
1 minute. The paralyzed target can repeat the saving throw
at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on
a success.
If the paralyzed creature is Medium or smaller, the retriever
can pick it up as part of the retriever’s move and walk or climb
with it at full speed.
Spellcasting. The retriever casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Wisdom as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 13):
3/day each: plane shift (only self and up to one incapacitated
creature, which is considered willing for the spell), web
- • - - ....... ....—
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 209

=== PAGE 210 ===
Rutterkin
Rutterkins are warped demons that roam the Abyss
in mobs, constantly searching for intruders to sur­
round and devour. These Fiends protect the Abyss
from non-demons. When they spot any interlopers,
they gather in a crowd and surge forward, emitting
a wave of fear in advance of their attacks that leaves
their victims terrified and rooted in place.
Creatures bitten by rutterkins are exposed to a
terrible disease that infects them with the corrupt­
ing influence of the Abyss. Victims afflicted with the
disease experience tremendous pain as their bodies
become disfigured, flesh twisting around the bones,
until they transform to join the mass of manes de­
mons (see the Monster Manual) that follow in the
wake of the rutterkin mob that laid them low.
---------------- . ■. ---------i ........ - - .
Rutterkin
Medium Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 37 (5d8+ 15)
Speed 20 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 15 (+2) 17 (+3) 5 (-3) 12 (+1) 6 (-2)
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages understands Abyssal but can’t speak
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Immobilizing Fear. When a creature that isn’t a demon starts
its turn within 30 feet of one or more rutterkins, that creature
must make a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw. The creature has
disadvantage on the save if it’s within 30 feet of six or more
rutterkins. On a failed save, the creature becomes frightened
of the rutterkins for 1 minute. While frightened in this way, the
creature is restrained. At the end of each of the frightened crea­
ture’s turns, it can repeat the saving throw, ending the effect
on itself on a success. On a successful save, the creature is im­
mune to the Crippling Fear of all rutterkins for 24 hours.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 12 (3d6 + 2) piercing damage. Ifthe target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw against
disease or become poisoned. At the end of each long rest, the
poisoned target can repeat the saving throw, ending the effect
on itself on a success. If the target is reduced to 0 hit points
while poisoned in this way, it dies and instantly transforms into
a living manes (see the Monster Manual). The transformation
can be undone only by a wish spell.
210 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
u you've
€u<)k, tu « ' A sequel,
crowA-
M wkeu you W. Kisses/)

=== PAGE 211 ===
Sea Spawn
Many of the stories sung as sea chanteys and re­
counted in dockside taverns tell of people lost to the
sea—but not merely drowned and gone. Some un­
fortunates taken by the ocean live on as sea spawn,
haunting the waves like tortured reflections of their
former selves. Coral encrusts them. Barnacles cling
to their cold skin. Lungs that once filled with air can
now breathe in water as well.
Tales provide myriad reasons for these strange
transformations. Folklore warns against falling
in love with a sea elf or merfolk, braving storms
in hopes of a bounteous catch, and promising
your heart to a sea god. Such cautionary tales
disguise the deeper truth: things lurking beneath
the waves strive to claim the hearts and minds of
land dwellers.
Krakens, morkoths, sea hags, marids, storm gi­
ants, dragon turtles (morkoths appear in this book;
the others appear in the Monster Manual')—all of
these and more can mark mortals as their own and
claim them as minions. Unlucky folk might become
beholden to such a master through a bleak bargain,
or they might find themselves cursed by one. Once
warped into a fishlike form, a sea spawn can’t leave
the water for long without courting death.
Sea spawn come in a wide variety of forms. An
individual might have a tentacle for an arm, the jaws
of a shark, a sea urchin’s spines, a whale’s fin, octo­
pus eyes, seaweed hair, or any combination of such
qualities. Some of these piscine body parts provide
them with special abilities.
The Sea Spawn of Purple Rocks
Visitors to a string of islands called the Purple
Rocks (in the Forgotten Realms setting) might
notice one curious fact about the islands’ human
inhabitants: no infants or elderly are among them.
This is because babies born to the Rocklanders
are claimed by a kraken (see the Monster Manual)
named Slarkrethel. The experience transforms the
children into fanatics dedicated to the kraken. They
return from the sea as humans, but when they reach
old age, they transform into sea spawn and rejoin
their master in the depths. Some children return
having suffered partial transformations and must
conceal themselves from strangers until their full
transformation in order to keep the secret of the
Purple Rocks.
Kraken priests (in this book) tend to the kraken’s
flock. Most of the priests are island natives, but
some are other sorts of creatures that live in the
water around the Purple Rocks, such as merfolk or
merrow (both of which appear in the Monster Man­
ual), or even sea elves.
--col--
Sea Spawn
Medium Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 32 (5d8 + 10)
Speed 20 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 8 (-1) 15 (+2) 6 (-2) 10 (+0) 8 (-1)
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands Aquan and Common but can’t speak
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Limited Amphibiousness. The sea spawn can breathe air and
water, but it needs to be submerged in the sea at least once a
day for 1 minute to avoid suffocating.
Actions
Multiattack. The sea spawn makes two Unarmed Strike attacks
and one Piscine Anatomy attack.
Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 4 (1 d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage.
Piscine Anatomy. The sea spawn uses one of the following op­
tions (choose one or roll a d6):
1-2: Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
3-4: Poison Quills. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5
ft., one creature. Hit: 3 (1 d6) poison damage, and the tar­
get must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or
be poisoned for 1 minute. The target can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on
itself on a success.
5-6: Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 12) if it is a Medium or smaller creature.
Until this grapple ends, the sea spawn can’t use this tentacle
on another target.
- - -....................... —■ . , .
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 211

=== PAGE 212 ===
Shadar-kai
In the gloom of the Shadowfell live shadar-kai, elves
whose ancestors served the Raven Queen, a god of
death and memory. They were brought to that realm
in ages past, so long ago that they’re now adapted
to its cheerless environment, both physically
and mentally.
Eons of exposure to the influence of the Shadow­
fell has left shadar-kai often joyless and mournful.
In that realm, they have pale hair, wrinkled gray
skin, and swollen joints that give them a corpse­
like aspect. They appear more youthful while on
other planes, but their skin always retains a deathly
ashen hue. When in the Shadowfell, they detest mir­
rors and avoid keeping things that remind them of
their age.
Shadar-kai of the Raven Queen watch over both
the Shadowfell and the Material Plane, scouting out
choice souls and tragedies that might please their
deity. They are rumored to be able to coax worldly
events along tragic paths for her amusement. The
Raven Queen is famously cryptic even to her most
devoted followers, however; their efforts are re­
warded only with vague omens they interpret as
best they can.
212 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Fortress of Memories
The shadar-kai who are most devoted to the Raven
Queen serve her at the Fortress of Memories, her
twisted castle in the Shadowfell. The fortress is a
mournful place, filled with incessant echoes of the
past. Flocks of ravens that act as the Raven Queen’s
eyes and ears darken the skies around it when they
emerge from within, bearing her cryptic messages
and omens far and wide across the multiverse.
Within the fortress are items that the Raven
Queen finds irresistible: objects invested with deep
feelings of sorrow, longing, or remorse. These items
are brought to her as gifts from the shadar-kai,
and include furniture, clocks, mirrors, jewels, and
toys. Ghostly visions of people, places, and pets
also appear in the fortress. Any of these things can
spontaneously appear about her lair, every object
and apparition being a metaphoric representation of
some story—great or small—that was saturated with
raw emotion.
Shadar-kai encountered outside the Shadowfell
are often on quests to find the most sorrow-touched
items they can find to bring back to their queen’s
gloomy castle.

=== PAGE 213 ===
Gloom Weaver
Although they’re formidable warriors, gloom weav­
ers are often content to hide in the shadows, watch­
ing as their very presence affects their victims.
Their bleak energy weighs down the heart, causing
those nearby to feel the approach of death. If de­
tected, gloom weavers use their shadow magic to
reduce enemies to ghastly corpses.
Shadow Dancer
Those who have fought shadow dancers describe
the experience as similar to fighting a living dark­
ness. Every dim alcove and darkened nook is a place
Shadar-kai Gloom Weaver
Medium Humanoid (Elf), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 14 (17 with mage armor)
Hit Points 104 (16d8 + 32)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
ll(+0) 18 (+4) 14 (+2) 15(4-2) 12(4-1) 18 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex 4-8, Con 4-6
Damage Immunities necrotic
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Common, Elvish
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus 4-4
Burden of Time. Beasts and Humanoids (except elves) have
disadvantage on saving throws while within 10 feet of the
shadar-kai.
Fey Ancestry. The shadar-kai has advantage on saving throws
against being charmed, and magic can’t put it to sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The shadar-kai makes three Shadow Spear at­
tacks. It can replace one attack with a use of Spellcasting.
Shadow Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: 4-8 to hit,
reach 5 ft. or range 30/120, one target. Hit: 7 (1 d6 4- 4) piercing
damage plus 26 (4dl 2) necrotic damage. Hit or Miss: The spear
magically returns to the shadar-kai’s hand immediately after a
ranged attack.
Spellcasting. The shadar-kai casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 16):
At will: arcane eye, mage armor, minor illusion, prestidigitation,
speak with dead
1/day each: arcane gate, bane, confusion, darkness, fear, major
image, true seeing
Reactions______________________________
Misty Escape (Recharge 6). When the shadar-kai takes damage,
it turns invisible and teleports, along with any equipment it is
wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space it can
see. It remains invisible until the start of its next turn or until it
attacks or casts a spell.
. - Ll ------ ■ ■ ....
--col--
the lithe and acrobatic shadow dancers can emerge
from to ambush their prey. Using this tactic, they
attack their enemies from all angles with a flurry
of entangling chains that hold fast and corrupt the
flesh. When their quarry is helpless, they dispatch
it and then loot the corpse for trinkets, particularly
anything colorful and lively to gaze at after they re­
turn to the gloom of the Shadowfell.
Soul Monger
Wracked with despair over the loss of memories of a
brighter time, soul mongers crave the vitality of oth­
ers. The aching void within a soul monger radiates
outward, manifesting as an unbearable weight that
drains the vigor of anyone unfortunate enough to be
in their presence. Those who have escaped the on­
slaught of a soul monger can hardly shake the mem­
ory of the sound they make—the moan of a tortured
soul, lost in a bottomless well of tragedy.
I ■ _ ... . .......— ...... I
Shadar-kai Shadow Danger
Medium Humanoid (Elf), Any Alignment
Armor Class 15 (studded leather)
Hit Points 71 (13d8 + 13)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
12 (+1) 16 (+3) 13(4-1) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 12 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex 4-6, Cha -t-4
Skills Stealth 4-6
Damage Resistances necrotic
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Common, Elvish
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus 4-3
Fey Ancestry. The shadar-kai has advantage on saving throws
against being charmed, and magic can’t put it to sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The shadar-kai makes three Spiked Chain attacks.
It can use Shadow Jump after one of these attacks.
Spiked Chain. Melee Weapon Attack: 4-6 to hit, reach 10 ft.,
one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 4- 3) piercing damage. The target must
succeed on a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw or suffer one of the
following effects (choose one or roll a d6):
1-2: Decay. The target takes 22 (4dl0) necrotic damage.
3-4: Crappie. The target is grappled (escape DC 14) if it is
