Dybbuk
Dybbuks are demons that terrorize mortals on the
Material Plane by possessing corpses and giving
them a semblance of life, after which the demons
use them to engage in a range of sordid activities.
In their natural form, dybbuks appear as translu­
cent flying jellyfish, trailing long tentacles as they
move through the air. They rarely travel in this fash­
ion, however. Instead, a dybbuk possesses a suitable
corpse as a vehicle, rousing the body from death.
Dybbuks delight in terrorizing other creatures
by making their host bodies behave in horrifying
ways—throwing up gouts of blood, excreting piles
of squirming maggots, and contorting their limbs in
impossible ways as they scuttle across the ground.
Dybbuk
Medium Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 37 (5d8 + 15)
Speed 0 ft., 40 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
6 (-2) 19 (+4) 16 (+3) 16(+3) 15 (+2) 14(4-2)
Skills Deception 4-6, Intimidation 4-4, Perception 4-4
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder;
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Abyssal, Common, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus 4-2
Incorporeal Movement. The dybbuk can move through other
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5
(IdlO) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object.
Magic Resistance. The dybbuk has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Action
Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: 4-6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 13 (2d8 4- 4) necrotic damage. If the target is a crea­
ture, its hit point maximum is also reduced by 3 (1 d6). This
reduction lasts until the target finishes a short or long rest. The
target dies if its hit point maximum is reduced to 0.
Possess Corpse (Recharge 6). The dybbuk disappears into an
intact corpse within 5 feet of it that belonged to a Large or
smaller Beast or Humanoid. The dybbuk gains 20 temporary
hit points. While possessing the corpse, the dybbuk adopts the
corpse’s size and can’t use Incorporeal Movement. Its game
statistics otherwise remain the same.
--col--
The possession lasts until the temporary hit points are lost
or the dybbuk ends it as a bonus action. When the possession
ends, the dybbuk appears in an unoccupied space within 5 feet
of the corpse.
Spellcasting. The dybbuk casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 12):
At will: dimension door
3/day: phantasmal force
Bonus Actions
Control Corpse. While Possess Corpse is active, the dybbuk
makes the corpse do something unnatural, such as vomit
blood, twist its head all the way around, or cause a quadruped
to move as a biped. Any Beast or Humanoid that sees this
behavior must succeed on a DC 12 Wisdom saving throw or
become frightened of the dybbuk for 1 minute. The frightened
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. A creature that
succeeds on a saving throw against this ability is immune to
Control Corpse for 24 hours.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY

=== PAGE 114 ===
Eidolon
To protect sites they deem holy, gods often rely on e
dolons, ghostly spirits bound to safeguard a sacred
place. Forged from the souls of those with unwav­
ering devotion, eidolons stalk temples and vaults to
ensure that no enemy defiles, damages, or plunders
these sites. If an enemy sets foot inside a warded
location, the eidolon plunges into a statue specially
prepared to house its soul; it then animates this ef­
figy and uses the statue to drive out the intruders.
Eidolon
Medium Undead, Any Alignment
Armor Class 9
Hit Points 63 (18d8 - 18)
Speed 0 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
7 (-2) 8(-l) 9 (-1) 14 (+2) 19 (+4) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Wis +8
Skills Perception +8
Damage Resistances acid, fire, lightning, thunder; bludgeoning
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities cold, necrotic, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Incorporeal Movement. The eidolon can move through other
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes
5 (IdlO) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object other
than a sacred statue.
Sacred Animation (Recharge 5-6). When the eidolon moves
into a space occupied by a sacred statue, the eidolon can disap
pear, causing the statue to become a creature under the eido­
lon’s control. The eidolon uses the sacred statue’s stat block in
place of its own.
Turn Resistance. The eidolon has advantage on saving throws
against any effect that turns Undead.
Unusual Nature. The eidolon doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Divine Dread. Each creature within 60 feet of the eidolon that
can see it must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or
be frightened of it for 1 minute. While frightened in this way,
the creature must take the Dash action and move away from
the eidolon by the safest available route at the start of each of
its turns, unless there is nowhere for it to move, in which case
the creature also becomes stunned until it can move again. A
frightened target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each
of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a target’
saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, the target is
immune to any eidolon’s Divine Dread for the next 24 hours.
114 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
ei­
o
s
Sacred Statue
Large Construct, As the Eidolon's Alignment
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 95 (lOdlO + 40)
Speed 25 ft.
g,
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 8 (-1) 19 (+4) 14 (+2) 19 (+4) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Wis +8
Damage Resistances acid, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities cold, necrotic, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages the languages the eidolon knew in life
False Appearance. If the statue is motionless at the start of
p­ combat, it has advantage on its initiative roll. Moreover, if a
creature hasn’t observed the statue move or act, that creature
n must succeed on a DC 18 Intelligence (Investigation) check to
discern that the statue isn’t an object.
Ghostly Inhabitant. The eidolon that enters the statue remains
inside it until the statue drops to 0 hit points, the eidolon uses
a bonus action to move out of the statue, or the eidolon is
turned or forced out by an effect such as the dispel evil and good
spell. When the eidolon leaves the statue, it appears in an un­
occupied space within 5 feet of the statue.
Inert. Without an eidolon inside, the statue is an object.
Unusual Nature. The statue doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The statue makes two Slam or Rock attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
h
Hit: 43 (6dl2 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
’s
s Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, range 60 ft./240 ft., one
target. Hit: 37 (6dl0 + 4) bludgeoning damage.

=== PAGE 115 ===
l[ an autumn ela<Arin invites you over [or
dinner, come with an empty stomach.
Their goodwill extends to heaping portions-
Note to $el[: Sen<{ Some o[ mi^ Spring elaitrin
[rienJls to visit MoriAenlcainen. That'll teach
him to lighten up.
TASHA
Eladrin
Eladrin dwell in the verdant splendor of the Feywild.
They are related to the elves found on the Material
Plane. But while other elves can temper their wild
impulses, eladrin are ruled by emotion—and due to
their magical nature, they undergo physical changes
to match their changes in temperament.
Eladrin have spent centuries in the Feywild, and
most of them have become Fey creatures as a re­
sult—those presented here are of the Fey variety.
Some are still Humanoid, however, similar in that
respect to their other elven kin.
The magic flowing through eladrin responds to
their emotional state by transforming them into dif­
ferent seasonal aspects, with behaviors and abilities
that change with their forms. Some eladrin might
remain in a particular aspect for years, while others
run through the emotional spectrum each week.
ChangeableJSTatures
Whenever one of the eladrin presented here finishes
a long rest, they can associate themself with a dif­
ferent season, provided they aren’t incapacitated.
When the eladrin makes this change, they use
the stat block of the new season rather than their
old stat block. Any damage the eladrin sustained
in their previous form applies to the new form,
as do any conditions or other ongoing effects af­
fecting them.
Autumn Eladrin
Eladrin often enter the autumn season when they
are overcome by feelings of goodwill. In this aspect,
they defuse conflicts and alleviate suffering by using
their magic to relieve any ailments that afflict the
people who come to them for aid. They tolerate no
violence in their presence and move quickly to settle
disputes, to ensure that peace continues to reign.
--col--
Autumn Eladrin
Medium Fey (Elf), Typically Chaotic Neutral
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 165 (22d8 + 66)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
12 (+1) 16 (+3) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 17 (+3) 18 (+4)
Skills Insight +7, Medicine +7
Damage Resistances psychic
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Enchanting Presence. Any non-eladrin creature that starts its
turn within 60 feet of the eladrin must make a DC 16 Wisdom
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature becomes charmed
by the eladrin for 1 minute. On a successful save, the crea­
ture becomes immune to any eladrin’s Enchanting Presence
for 24 hours.
Whenever the eladrin deals damage to the charmed creature,
the charmed creature can repeat the saving throw, ending the
effect on itself on a success.
Magic Resistance. The eladrin has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The eladrin makes two Longsword or Longbow
attacks. It can replace one attack with a use of Spellcasting.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 5 (ld8 + 1) slashing damage, or 6 (IdlO + 1) slashing
damage if used with two hands, plus 22 (5d8) psychic damage.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 150/600 ft.,
one target. Hit: 7 (1 d8 + 3) piercing damage plus 22 (5d8) psy­
chic damage.
Spellcasting. The eladrin casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 16):
At will: hold person
2/day each: cure wounds (as a 5th-level spell), lesser restoration
1/day each: greater restoration, revivify
Bonus Actions
Fey Step (Recharge 4-6). The eladrin teleports, along with any
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 30 feet to an unoccu­
pied space it can see.
Reactions
Foster Peace. If a creature charmed by the eladrin hits with an
attack roll while within 60 feet of the eladrin, the eladrin mag­
ically causes the attack to miss, provided the eladrin can see
the attacker.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 115

=== PAGE 116 ===
Spring Eladrin
Their hearts filled with joy, spring eladrin cavort
through their sylvan realms, their songs and laugh­
ter filling the air. These playful eladrin beguile other
creatures to fill them with the joy of spring. Their
antics can lead other creatures into danger and
make mischief for them.
Spring Eladrin
Medium Fey (Elf), Typically Chaotic Neutral
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 165 (22d8 + 66)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 16 (+3) 16 (+3) 18 (+4) 11 (+0) 18 (+4)
Skills Deception +8, Persuasion +8
Damage Resistances psychic
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Joyful Presence. Any non-eladrin creature that starts its turn
within 60 feet of the eladrin must make a DC 16 Wisdom saving
throw. On a failed save, the creature becomes charmed by the
eladrin for 1 minute. On a successful save, the creature be­
comes immune to any eladrin's Joyful Presence for 24 hours.
Whenever the eladrin deals damage to the charmed creature,
the charmed creature can repeat the saving throw, ending the
effect on itself on a success.
Magic Resistance. The eladrin has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The eladrin makes two Longsword or Longbow
attacks. It can replace one attack with a use of Spellcasting.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 6 (1 d8 + 2) slashing damage, or 7 (IdlO + 2) slashing
damage if used with two hands, plus 22 (5d8) psychic damage.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 150/600 ft.,
one target. Hit: 7 (1 d8 + 3) piercing damage plus 22 (5d8) psy­
chic damage.
Spellcasting. The eladrin casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 16):
At will: Tasha’s hideous laughter
1/day each: major image, suggestion
Bonus Actions
Fey Step (Recharge 4-6). The eladrin teleports, along with any
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 30 feet to an unoccu­
pied space it can see.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Summer Eladrin
When angered, eladrin enter the season of summer,
a burning, tempestuous state that transforms them
into aggressive warriors eager to vent their wrath.
Their magic responds to their fury and amplifies
their fighting ability, helping them move with aston­
ishing quickness and strike with terrible force.
Summer Eladrin
Medium Fey (Elf), Typically Chaotic Neutral
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 165 (22d8 + 66)
Speed 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 21 (+5) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 18 (+4)
Skills Athletics +8, Intimidation +8
Damage Resistances fire
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Fearsome Presence. Any non-eladrin creature that starts its turn
within 60 feet of the eladrin must make a DC 16 Wisdom saving
throw. On a failed save, the creature becomes frightened of the
eladrin for 1 minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw
at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a
success. If a creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect
ends for it, the creature is immune to any eladrin’s Fearsome
Presence for the next 24 hours.
Magic Resistance. The eladrin has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The eladrin makes two Longsword or Long­
bow attacks.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage, or 15 (2dl0 + 4) slash­
ing damage if used with two hands, plus 9 (2d8) fire damage.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 150/600
ft., one target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8)
fire damage.
Bonus Actions
Fey Step (Recharge 4-6). The eladrin teleports, along with any
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 30 feet to an unoccu­
pied space it can see.
Reactions
Parry. The eladrin adds 3 to its AC against one melee attack
that would hit it. To do so, the eladrin must see the attacker
and be wielding a melee weapon.

=== PAGE 117 ===
Winter Eladrin
When sorrow distresses eladrin, they enter the win­
ter season, becoming figures of melancholy. Frozen
tears drop from their cheeks, and their palpable sad­
ness emanates from them as icy cold.
i 1 1 1____'. _ ........... _ . ___
Winter Eladrin
Medium Fey (Elf), Typically Chaotic Neutral
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 165 (22d8 + 66)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
11 (+0) 16 (+3) 16 (+3) 18 (+4) 17(+3) 13 (+1)
Damage Resistances cold
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus 4-4
Magic Resistance. The eladrin has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Sorrowful Presence. Any non-eladrin creature that starts its
turn within 60 feet of the eladrin must make a DC 13 Wisdom
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature becomes charmed
by the eladrin for 1 minute. While charmed in this way, the
creature has disadvantage on ability checks and saving throws.
The charmed creature can repeat the saving throw at the end
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If
a creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it,
the creature is immune to any eladrin’s Sorrowful Presence for
the next 24 hours.
Whenever the eladrin deals damage to the charmed creature,
the charmed creature can repeat the saving throw, ending the
effect on itself on a success.
Actions
Multiattack. The eladrin makes two Longsword or Longbow
attacks. It can replace one attack with a use of Spellcasting.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 4 (1 d8) slashing damage, or 5 (IdlO) slashing damage
if used with two hands, plus 13 (3d8) cold damage.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 150/600
ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1 d8 4- 3) piercing damage plus 13 (3d8)
cold damage.
Spellcasting. The eladrin casts one of the following spells, re­
quiring no material components and using Intelligence as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 16):
At will:/og cloud, gust of wind, sleet storm
Bonus Actions
Fey Step (Recharge 4-6). The eladrin teleports, along with any
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 30 feet to an unoccu­
pied space it can see.
Reactions
Frigid Rebuke. When the eladrin takes damage from a creature
the eladrin can see within 60 feet of it, the eladrin can force that
creature to make a DC 16 Constitution saving throw. On a failed
save, the creature takes 11 (2dl0) cold damage.
--col--


=== PAGE 118 ===
Elder Brain
The ultimate expression of mind flayer domination,
an elder brain sprawls within a vat of viscous brine,
cared for by mind flayer minions as it touches the
thoughts of creatures near and far. It scrawls upon
the canvas of the creatures’ minds, rewriting their
thoughts and authoring their dreams.
An elder brain sustains itself by consuming the
brains of other creatures. If its mind flayer servants
don’t bring meals directly to it, the elder brain
reaches out with tendrils of thought, compelling
creatures to come to it so that it can feed on them.
When a mind flayer perishes, the elder brain’s
servants feed its brain to their master, which then
absorbs the knowledge and experience contained
therein. Mind flayers conceive of this oneness with
the elder brain as a sacred state akin to an afterlife.
Hive Mind
Elder brains are so-called among non-illithids be­
cause they act as the central communication hub for
an entire mind flayer colony, just as a brain does for
a living body. Linked to the elder brain, the colony
acts like a single organism, acting in concert as if
each illithid were the digit of a hand.
An elder brain considers itself and its desires
the most important things in the multiverse, and
the mind flayers in its colony nothing more than
extensions of its will. Each presides over its colony
according to its own unique personality and store­
house of collected knowledge and experience. Some
elder brains reign as tyrants, while others serve
as sages, counselors, and repositories of informa­
tion and lore for the mind flayers that protect and
nourish them.
An Elder Brain’s Lair
The lair of an elder brain lies deep in the heart of
a mind flayer colony. The brain dwells in a dimly
glowing brine pool filled with brackish water in­
fused with its vital fluids and psionic energy.
An elder brain’s ambitions are always tempered
by its relative immobility. Although its telepathic
senses can reach for miles, moving anywhere is
always a dangerous proposition. If forced outside
its brine pool, an elder brain swiftly expires, and
transporting an elder brain in its pool through con­
fining and tortuous subterranean tunnels frequently
proves difficult or impossible.
n8 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), an el­
der brain can take one of the following lair actions;
the elder brain can’t take the same lair action two
rounds in a row:
Force Wall. The elder brain casts wall of force.
Psionic Anchor. The elder brain targets one crea­
ture it can sense within 120 feet of it and anchors
it by sheer force of will. The target must make a
DC 18 Charisma saving throw. On a failed save,
its speed is reduced to 0, and it can’t teleport. It
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of
its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Psychic Inspiration. The elder brain targets one
friendly creature it can sense within 120 feet of it.
The target has a flash of inspiration and gains ad­
vantage on one attack roll, ability check, or saving
throw it makes before the end of its next turn.

=== PAGE 119 ===

--col--
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 119

=== PAGE 120 ===
Regional Effects
The territory within 5 miles of an elder brain is al­
tered by the creature’s psionic presence, which cre­
ates one or more of the following effects:
Paranoia. Creatures within 5 miles of an elder
brain feel as if they are being followed, even when
they’re not.
Psychic Whispers. Any creature with which the el­
