that is hit must also succeed on a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw
or be knocked prone.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 227

=== PAGE 228 ===
Star Spawn Larva Mage
A larva mage is a nightmarish combination of a
mortal body and otherworldly substance. When a
powerful cultist of a wormlike entity such as Kyuss
or Kezef—usually a warlock or other spellcaster—
contacts the comet-borne emissary of an Elder Evil,
the emissary can merge with a mortal conscious­
ness to create a larva mage. None of the original
cultist’s personality survives the transformation;
what emerges is wholly alien.
i .......—• _____________:
Star Spawn Larva Mage
Medium Aberration, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 168 (16d8 + 96)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 12 (+1) 23 (+6) 18 (+4) 12 (+1) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +6, Cha +8
Skills Perception +6
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities psychic
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed,
petrified, poisoned, restrained
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Deep Speech
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Return to Worms. When the mage is reduced to 0 hit points, it
breaks apart into a swarm of insects (see the Monster Manual)
in the same space. Unless the swarm is destroyed, the mage
reforms from it 24 hours later.
Actions
Multiattack. The mage makes three Slam or Eldritch
Bolt attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) bludgeoning damage, and the target must suc­
ceed on a DC 19 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned until
the end of its next turn.
Eldritch Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +8 to hit, range 60 ft., one
target. Hit: 19 (3dl0 + 3) force damage.
Plague of Worms (Recharge 6). Each creature other than a star
spawn within 10 feet of the mage must succeed on a DC 19
Dexterity saving throw or take 22 (5d8) necrotic damage and
be blinded and restrained by masses of swarming worms. The
affected creature takes 22 (5d8) necrotic damage at the start
of each of the mage’s turns. The creature can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself
on a success.
228 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Spellcasting. The mage casts one of the following spells, requir­
ing no material components and using Charisma as the spell­
casting ability (spell save DC 16):
At will: mage hand, message, minor illusion
1/day: dominate monster
Reactions
Feed on Weakness. When a creature within 20 feet of the mage
fails a saving throw, the mage gains 10 temporary hit points.
Legendary Actions
The mage can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op­
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a
time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The mage
regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Slam. The mage makes one Slam attack.
Eldritch Bolt (Costs 2 Actions). The mage makes one Eldritch
Bolt attack.
Feed (Costs 3 Actions). Each creature restrained by the mage’s
Plague of Worms takes 13 (3d8) necrotic damage, and the
mage gains 6 temporary hit points.

=== PAGE 229 ===
Star Spawn Mangler
A mangier is a low-slung, creeping horror with mul­
tiple gangly arms—it most often has six arms but
can have any number from four to eight. Manglers
creep along the ground or the walls, sticking to
shadows and hiding in spots that seem too shallow
or well-lit to conceal anything. They appear smaller
than their true size, thanks to their hunched posture
and emaciated frames. Cultists summon these crea­
tures to serve as guards and assassins, two roles at
which they excel.
--col--
cvic
ccni(
Star Spawn Mangler
Medium Aberration, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 71 (13d8 + 13)
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
8 (-1) 18 (+4) 12 (+1) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +4
Skills Stealth +7
Damage Resistances cold
Damage Immunities psychic
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, prone
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Deep Speech
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Ambusher. The mangier has advantage on initiative rolls.
Actions
Multiattack. The mangier makes two Claw attacks.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (1 d8 + 4) slashing damage. If the attack roll has advan­
tage, the target also takes 7 (2d6) psychic damage.
Flurry of Claws (Recharge 5-6). The mangier makes six Claw
attacks. Either before or after these attacks, it can move up to
its speed without provoking opportunity attacks.
Bonus Actions
Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the mangier
takes the Hide action.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 229

=== PAGE 230 ===
Star Spawn Seer
A star spawn seer is most often encountered as the
leader of a cult dedicated to one or more Elder Evils.
Usually, the seer is the only cult member that grasps
the full extent of the horror the cult is venerating.
The seer’s goal is to tap into vast energy sources
and perform the dire rites that will extend a bridge
between the Material Plane and the squirming
chaos of an Elder Evil’s realm.
An entity that appears as a star spawn seer in the
Material Plane usually arrives disembodied. When
a warlock or other spellcaster establishes commu­
nication with it, the seer-entity takes control of the
mortal, transforming it into a star spawn seer. Who­
ever the mortal once was largely vanishes beneath
the mass of tumorous skin than builds up in strange
whorls all over the seer’s body. The mortal’s hands
become bulky, flipper-like appendages able to grasp
the seer’s strange staff formed of a blend of flesh,
bone, and star stuff.
230 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
A star spawn seer is almost always accompanied
by one or more star spawn hulks (also in this book).
Not only is a hulk a powerful combatant, but when
a seer deals psychic damage to a hulk, the hulk isn’t
hurt, and the effect ricochets off and expands to as­
sault other creatures.
Star Spawn Seer
Medium Aberration, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 153 (18d8 + 72)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 12 (+1) 18 (+4) 22 (+6) 19 (+4) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Int +11, Wis +9, Cha +8
Skills Perception +9
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities psychic
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 19
Languages Common, Deep Speech, Undercommon
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Out-of-Phase Movement. The seer can move through other
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain, and its
movement doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks.
Each creature it moves through takes 5 (IdlO) psychic dam­
age; no creature can take this damage more than once per turn.
The seer takes 5 (1 d 10) force damage if it ends its turn inside
an object.
Actions
Multiattack. The seer makes two Comet Staff or Psychic
Orb attacks.
Comet Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (1 d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage plus 18 (4d8)
psychic damage, and if the target is a creature, it must succeed
on a DC 19 Constitution saving throw or be incapacitated until
the end of its next turn.
Psychic Orb. Ranged Spell Attack: +11 to hit, range 120 feet, one
creature. Hit: 27 (5dl0) psychic damage.
Collapse Distance (Recharge 6). The seer warps space around
one creature it can see within 30 feet of it. That creature must
make a DC 19 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the tar­
get, along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying, is tele­
ported up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space the seer can see,
and then each creature within 10 feet of the target’s original
space takes 39 (6dl2) psychic damage. On a successful save,
the target takes 19 (3dl2) psychic damage and isn’t teleported.
Reactions
Bend Space. When the seer would be hit by an attack roll, it
teleports, along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying,
exchanging positions with another star spawn it can see within
60 feet of it. The other star spawn is hit by the attack instead.

=== PAGE 231 ===
Steeders
Giant hunting spiders, steeders prowl the depths of
the Underdark. Female steeders grow larger and
stronger than males, and the female often devours
the male after breeding. Numerous Underdark folk
domesticate steeders, particularly duergar (also in
this book). Typically the females serve as steeds in
battle, while the males are used as draft animals.
Steeders attempt to tear apart perceived threats—
and consider even other steeders enemies. When
they’re put to work, their handlers must stable them
separately from one another and place blinders on
them to keep them from attacking each other.
Steeders are intelligent enough to
learn simple hand signals and vocal
commands, but even a domesticated
steeder might turn against its handler.
Training a steeder requires a rider
to bond with it, a process that begins
shortly after the steeder hatches. As it
grows, its rider works with it to direct
its predatory instincts.
Rather than spinning webs, steed­
ers excrete a viscous substance from
their legs. This goo allows them to
creep along walls and ceilings and to
grapple prey.
Female Steeder
Large Monstrosity, Unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 30 (4dl0 + 8)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 3 (-4)
Skills Stealth +7, Perception +4
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Extraordinary Leap. The distance of the steeder’s long jumps
is tripled; every foot of its walking speed that it spends on the
jump allows it to move 3 feet.
Spider Climb. The steeder can climb difficult surfaces, in­
cluding upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (1 d8 + 3) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8) poison damage.
Sticky Leg. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one Me­
dium or smaller creature. Hit: The target is stuck to the steed­
er’s leg and grappled (escape DC 12). The steeder can have
only one creature grappled at a time.
L~ , . .. - ---------------- . ...------------
--col--
Male Steeder
Medium Monstrosity, Unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 13 (2d8 + 4)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 12 (+1) 14 (+2) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 3 (-4)
Skills Stealth +5, Perception +4
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Extraordinary Leap. The distance of the steeder’s long jumps
is tripled; every foot of its walking speed that it spends on the
jump allows it to jump 3 feet.
Spider Climb. The steeder can climb difficult surfaces, in­
cluding upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage plus 4 (1 d8) poison damage.
Sticky Leg. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
Small or Tiny creature. Hit: The target is stuck to the steeder’s
leg and grappled (escape DC 12). The steeder can have only
one creature grappled at a time.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 231
■

=== PAGE 232 ===
Steel
Predator
A steel predator is a mer-
ciless machine with one
purpose: to locate and kill
its target regardless of dis­
tance and obstacles.
Steel predators are created by
a unique modron, using a machine lo­
cated in the city of Sigil. It wasn’t always
headquartered in the City of Doors, however. On its
original home, the plane of Mechanus, the ingenious
modron was lauded for its invention—until it turned
these creations against its superiors. Steel preda­
tors wreaked havoc against the modron hierarchy
until the rogue modron was trapped and exiled.
Now it operates a shop in Sigil where, for a steep
price, anyone can commission the manufacture of a
steel predator.
To create a steel predator, the modron’s machine
must be fed something that identifies the predator’s
target, such as a lock of hair, a well-worn glove, or a
much-used weapon. The moment the newly manu­
factured steel predator emerges, it bounds away in
search of its prey. It senses the location of its target
across planar boundaries, but such detection is ac­
curate only to within a thousand yards; to close the
remaining distance, the steel predator locates its
prey by sight and smell.
Once battle is joined, the predator ignores every
other threat to attack its target, unless other crea­
tures prevent it from reaching the target. In that
case, it does what it must to fulfill its mission.
If all goes according to plan, a steel predator
slays its target and then voluntarily returns to Sigil,
where it’s broken down into parts that can be used
in another steel predator. Battle damage can cause
this instinct to fail, however, in which case the steel
predator lingers in the area, hunting and killing
other creatures that resemble its target or that sim­
ply live nearby. Such rogue predators are dangerous
to anyone in the vicinity.
232 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Steel Predator
Large Construct, Typically Lawful Neutral
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 207 (18dl0 + 108)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
24 (+7) 17 (+3) 22 (+6) 4 (-3) 14 (+2) 6 (-2)
Skills Perception +7, Stealth +8, Survival +7
Damage Resistances cold, lightning, necrotic, thunder
Damage Immunities poison, psychic; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, stunned
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages understands Modron and the language of its owner
but can’t speak
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Magic Resistance. The steel predator has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Unusual Nature. The steel predator doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The steel predator makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 18 (2dl0 + 7) lightning damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (2d8 + 7) force damage.
Spellcasting. The steel predator casts one of the following
spells, requiring no spell components and using Wisdom as
the spellcasting ability:
3/day each: dimension door (self only), plane shift (self only)
Stunning Roar (Recharge 5-6). The steel predator emits a roar
in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC
19 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes
33 (6dl0) thunder damage, drops everything it’s holding, and
is stunned for 1 minute. The stunned creature can repeat the
saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect
on itself on a success. On a successful save, a creature takes
half as much damage and isn’t stunned.
-........" 11 .. T- ■ ir- --

=== PAGE 233 ===
Stone Cursed
Medium Construct, Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6)
Speed 10 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16(+3) 5 (-3) 14 (+2) 5 (-3) 8 (-1) 7 (-2)
Damage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
petrified, poisoned
Senses passive Perception 9
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Cunning Opportunist. The stone cursed has advantage on the
attack rolls of opportunity attacks.
False Appearance. If the stone cursed is motionless at the start
of combat, it has advantage on its initiative roll. Moreover, if
a creature hasn’t observed the stone cursed move or act, that
creature must succeed on a DC 18 Intelligence (Investigation)
check to discern that the stone cursed isn’t a statue.
Unusual Nature. The stone cursed doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Petrifying Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) slashing damage. If the target is
a creature, it must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving
throw, or it begins to turn to stone and is restrained until the
end of its next turn, when it must repeat the saving throw. The
effect ends if the second save is successful; otherwise the tar­
get is petrified for 24 hours.
--col--
Stone Cursed
Stone cursed are spawned through a foul alchemi­
cal ritual performed on a Humanoid that has been
turned to stone. The ritual, which requires a mix­
ture of basilisk blood and the ashes from the burned
feathers of a cockatrice, awakens a dim echo of the
petrified victim’s spirit, animating the statue and
turning it into a useful guardian.
Stone cursed possess a malevolent drive to slay
the living, yet they are utterly loyal to whoever per­
formed the ritual to animate them, and they obey
that being’s orders to the best of their ability.
In combat, stony claws that drip with thick, gray
sludge emerge from a stone cursed’s fingers. This
alchemical sludge transforms those slashed by the
claws into statues.
As part of the ritual used to create a stone cursed,
a fist-sized obsidian skull forms within the crea­
ture’s torso. The skull isn’t visible while the stone
cursed is active, but when it is slain, the statue
shatters and the skull clatters to the ground. Be­
cause it is the nexus for the alchemy used to create
these horrors, a faint echo of the original victim’s
memories resonates within the skull. A skilled
magic-wielder can attempt to extract memories
from it to gain insight into the victim’s past or find
lore that otherwise would be lost.
Cryptic Whispers
Even though a creature transformed into a stone
cursed is long dead, a vague whisper of their memo­
ries lives on in the obsidian skull embedded within
the stone cursed’s body. At the end of a short rest, a
character can make a DC 20 Intelligence (Arcana)
check to attempt to extract a memory from the skull
that is a response to a verbal question posed to the
skull by the character. Once this check is made,
whether it succeeds or fails, the skull can’t be used
in this manner again.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 233

=== PAGE 234 ===
Stone Giant
Dreamwalker
The surface of the world is an alien realm to stone
giants: fluctuating, temporary, exposed to gusting
wind and sudden rain. It is as wildly changeable as
a dream, and that’s how they regard it—as a dream.
Nothing there is permanent, so nothing there is
real. What happens on the surface doesn’t matter.
Promises and bargains made there needn’t be hon­
ored. Life and even art hold less value there.
Stone giants sometimes go on dream quests in
the surface world, seeking inspiration for their art,
a break from decades-long ennui, or satisfaction of
simple curiosity. Some who go on these quests let
themselves become lost in the dream. Other stone
giants are banished to the surface as punishment.
Regardless of the reason they ended up on the
surface, if they don’t take shelter under stone, such
stone giants can become dreamwalkers.
Dreamwalkers occupy an odd place of respect out­
side the stone giant ordning. They are considered
outcasts, but their familiarity with the surface world
makes them valuable guides, and their insights can
help other stone giants grasp the dangers of living
in a dream.
234 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Dreamwalkers become divorced from reality by
isolation, shame, and their unendingly alien sur­
roundings, and this delirium leaches out into the
world around them, affecting other creatures that
get too close. Believing that they’re living in a dream
and that their actions have no real consequences,
dreamwalkers act as they please, becoming forces
of chaos. As they travel the world, they collect ob­
jects and creatures that seem especially significant
to them. Over time, the collected things accrete to
their bodies, becoming encased in stone.
1 " .... : 1j.................... z
Stone Giant Dreamwalker
Huge Giant, Typically Chaotic Neutral
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 161 (14dl2 + 70)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
23 (+6) 14 (+2) 21 (+5) 10 (+0) 8 (-1) 12 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +9, Wis +3
Skills Athletics +14, Perception +3
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Common, Giant
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Dreamwalker’s Charm. An enemy that starts its turn within 30
feet of the giant must make a DC 13 Charisma saving throw,
provided that the giant isn’t incapacitated. On a failed save, the
creature is charmed by the giant. A creature charmed in this
way can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns,
ending the effect on itself on a success. Once it succeeds on
the saving throw, the creature is immune to this giant’s Dream­
walker’s Charm for 24 hours.
Actions
Multiattack. The giant makes two Greatclub or Rock attacks.
