on all attack rolls until the end of its next turn.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 15 (3d6 + 5) piercing damage, and the giant magically re­
gains hit points equal to the damage dealt.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 18 (3d8 + 5) bludgeoning damage.
—~........ -...... - —
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 187

=== PAGE 188 ===
Nabassu
The insatiable nabassus prowl the multiverse in
search of souls to devour. If they think they can kill
a creature and consume its soul, they attack—even
if that other creature is a demon, including an­
other nabassu.
Most other demons shun nabassus and force them
to live on the fringes of the Abyss. There, nabassus
pick off weaker demons or, if the situation warrants,
gather in packs to take down larger prey. Some es­
pecially powerful nabassus even search for demon
lords’ amulets.
Whenever magic pulls demons from the Abyss to
the Material Plane, nabassus try to get summoned
so that they can embark on a feast of souls there.
A summoned nabassu seeks to break free so that
it can devour the soul of its summoner and then
feed on the souls of whatever other creatures it can
catch. One way a summoner can avoid this fate is by
providing a steady supply of souls to the nabassu,
which might persuade the demon to be coopera­
tive—as long as the supply lasts.
Nabassu
Medium Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 190 (20d8 + 100)
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
22 (+6) 14 (+2) 21 (+5) 14 (+2) 15 (+2) 17 (+3)
Saving Throws Str +11, Dex +7
Skills Perception +7
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Demonic Shadows. The nabassu darkens the area around its
body in a 10-foot radius. Nonmagical light can’t illuminate this
area of dim light.
Devour Soul. A nabassu can eat the soul of a creature it has
killed within the last hour, provided that creature is neither a
Construct nor an Undead. The devouring requires the nabassu
to be within 5 feet of the corpse for at least 10 minutes, after
which it gains a number of Hit Dice (d8s) equal to half the
l88 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
........ .....------------------------ ....'
creature's number of Hit Dice. Roll those dice, and increase
the nabassu’s hit points by the numbers rolled. For every 4 Hit
Dice the nabassu gains in this way, its attacks deal an extra 3
(1 d6) damage on a hit. The nabassu retains these benefits for 6
days. A creature devoured by a nabassu can be restored to life
only by a wish spell.
Magic Resistance. The nabassu has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The nabassu makes one Bite attack and one Claw
attack, and it uses Soul-Stealing Gaze.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 38 (5dl2 + 6) necrotic damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 28 (4dl0 + 6) force damage.
Soul-Stealing Gaze. The nabassu targets one creature it can see
within 30 feet of it. If the target isn’t a Construct or an Undead,
it must succeed on a DC 16 Charisma saving throw or take 13
(2dl2) necrotic damage. The target's hit point maximum is
reduced by an amount equal to the necrotic damage dealt, and
the nabassu regains hit points equal to half that amount. This
reduction lasts until the target finishes a short or long rest. The
target dies if its hit point maximum is reduced to 0, and if the
target is a Humanoid, it immediately rises as a ghoul (see the
Monster Manual) under the nabassu’s control.

=== PAGE 189 ===
Nagpa
Medium Monstrosity (Wizard), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 203 (37d8 + 37)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
9 (-1) 15 (+2) 12 (+1) 23 (+6) 18 (+4) 21 (+5)
Saving Throws Int +12, Wis +10, Cha +11
Skills Arcana +12, Deception +11, History +12, Insight +10,
Perception +10
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 20
Languages Common plus up to five other languages
Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +6
Actions
Multiattack. The nagpa makes three Staff or Deathly Ray at­
tacks. It can replace one attack with a use of Spellcasting.
Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 24 (7d6) ne­
crotic damage.
Deathly Ray. Ranged Spell Attack: +12 to hit, range 120 ft., one
target. Hit: 30 (7d6 + 6) necrotic damage.
Spellcasting. The nagpa casts one of the following spells, using
Intelligence as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 20):
At will: detect magic, mage hand, message, minor illusion
2/day each: fireball, fiy, hold person, suggestion, wall offire
1/day each: dominate person, etherealness,feeblemind
Bonus Actions
Corruption. The nagpa targets one creature it can see within
90 feet of it. The target must make a DC 20 Charisma saving
throw. An evil creature makes the save with disadvantage. On a
failed save, the target is charmed by the nagpa until the start of
the nagpa’s next turn. On a successful save, the target becomes
immune to the nagpa’s Corruption for the next 24 hours.
Paralysis (Recharge 6). The nagpa forces each creature within
30 feet of it to make a DC 20 Wisdom saving throw, excluding
Undead and Constructs. On a failed save, a target is paralyzed
for 1 minute. A paralyzed target can repeat the saving throw
at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on
a success.
--col--
Long ago, the Raven Queen cursed a cabal of pow­
erful wizards for meddling in a ritual that would
have helped avert a war between the gods. She
transformed them into the scabrous, birdlike crea­
tures known as nagpas and rendered them able to
acquire new lore and magical power only from the
ruins of fallen civilizations and great calamities.
Nagpas still fear the Raven Queen and do their
best to avoid her and her agents. When it’s impossi­
ble to do so, they become cringing, fawning things,
eager to please and thereby escape further attention
from her cold gaze. All the original thirteen remain
alive, thanks to their cunning and their willingness
to do whatever is necessary to survive.
Hungry to claim more power despite the Ra­
ven Queen’s curse, nagpas strive to bring about
world-shaking destruction. From the shadows, they
manipulate events to bring about ruin. They can
bring to bear an array of spells to turn other crea­
tures into their agents, influencing their decisions
in subtle ways and making them unwitting accom­
plices in their own destruction. Nagpas are extraor­
dinarily patient and pursue several schemes simul­
taneously, so if one plan goes awry, they can shift
their focus to another. Typically, nagpas emerge
from the shadows only when they can deliver a
finishing blow. They then revel in the grand devasta­
tion their plotting brought about—looting libraries,
plundering vaults, and prying secrets of arcane lore
and power from the wreckage.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 189

=== PAGE 190 ===
Narzugon
Paladins who make deals with devils and carry
their twisted sense of honor into the afterlife are
especially valuable to the archdukes of the Nine
Hells. These narzugons act as horrific perversions
of knights errant, carrying out their masters’ will.
Narzugons wield hell-forged lances that shunt the
souls of any they killed to the River Styx for rebirth
as lemures (see the Monster Manual). Every lance
bears the marks of both a narzugon and its master.
-- - ..... 1 . .......................: . ---------
Narzugon
Medium Fiend (Devil), Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 20 (plate armor, shield)
Hit Points 112 (15d8 + 45)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
20 (+5) 10 (+0) 17 (+3) 16 (+3) 14(4-2) 19 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +8, Cha +9
Skills Perception +12
Damage Resistances acid, cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical attacks that arten’t silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22
Languages Common, Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Infernal Tack. The narzugon wears spurs that are part of infer­
nal tack, which allow it to summon its nightmare companion as
an action.
Magic Resistance. The narzugon has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The narzugon makes three Hellfire Lance attacks.
It also uses Infernal Command or Terrifying Command.
Hellfire Lance. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft.,
one target. Hit: 11 (1 dl2 + 5) piercing damage plus 16 (3dl0)
fire damage. If this damage kills a creature with a soul, the soul
rises from the River Styx as a lemure (see the Monster Manual)
in Avernus in 1 d4 hours. If the creature isn’t revived before
then, only a wish spell or killing the lemure and casting true
resurrection on the creature's original body can restore it to life.
Constructs and devils are immune to this effect.
Infernal Command. Each ally of the narzugon within 60 feet of
it can’t be charmed or frightened until the end of the narzu-
gon’s next turn.
Terrifying Command. Each creature within 60 feet of the narzu­
gon that isn't a Fiend must succeed on a DC 17 Charisma sav­
ing throw or become frightened of the narzugon for 1 minute.
A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. A creature that
makes a successful saving throw is immune to this narzugon’s
Terrifying Command for 24 hours.
Healing (1/Day). The narzugon, or one creature it touches, re­
gains 100 hit points.
. ......... - ----- . - .......i
19° CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Each narzugon claims a nightmare (see the Mon­
ster Manual) as its mount. These steeds are bound
by infernal tack (see below) and must respond to the
summons and commands of the spurs’ wearer.
Magic Item: Infernal Tack
Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement
by a Creature of Evil Alignment)
A rider binds a nightmare to its service with infernal
tack, which consists of a bridle, bit, reins, saddle,
and stirrups, along with spurs that are worn by the
rider. A nightmare equipped with infernal tack must
serve whoever wears the spurs until the wearer dies
or the tack is removed.
You can use an action to call a nightmare
equipped with infernal tack by clashing the spurs
together or scraping them through blood. The
nightmare appears at the start of your next turn,
within 20 feet of you. It acts as your ally and takes
its turn on your initiative count. It remains for 1
day, until you or it dies, or until you dismiss it as an
action. If the nightmare dies, it reforms in the Nine
Hells within 24 hours, after which you can sum­
mon it again.
The tack doesn’t conjure a nightmare; one must
first be subdued so the tack can be placed on it. No
nightmare accepts this forced servitude willingly,
but some eventually form strong loyalties to their
masters and become true partners in evil.

=== PAGE 191 ===
Neogi
A neogi looks like an outsize spider with an eel’s
neck and head. It can poison the body and the
mind of its targets and can subjugate even be­
ings that are physically superior.
Neogi usually dwell in far-flung locations
on the Material Plane, as well as in the
Astral Plane and the Ethereal Plane. They
left their home world long ago to conquer
and devour creatures in other realms.
During this era, they dominated umber
hulks and used them to build sleek, spidery
ships capable of traversing the multiverse.
Neogi Hatchling
A neogi lives about a century. When an in­
dividual is rendered weak by advanced age,
the other neogi in the group overpower it
and inject it with a special poison. The toxin
transforms the old neogi into a bloated mass
of flesh. Younger neogi lay their eggs atop it,
and when the hatchlings emerge, they devour
the old neogi and one another until only a few
of the strongest newborns are left. The surviving
neogi hatchlings begin their lives under the control
of adult neogi. They must learn about their society
and earn a place in it, and each one starts its train­
ing by gaining mastery over an umber hulk.
Neogi (Adult)
The mentality of neogi is alien to many other peo­
ples. Because adult neogi have the power to con­
trol minds, they consider doing so to be entirely
appropriate. Their society makes no distinction
between individuals, aside from the ability that a
given creature has to control others, and they don’t
comprehend the emotional aspects of existence that
humans and similar beings experience. To a neogi,
hatred is as foreign a sensation as love, and show­
ing loyalty in the absence of authority is foolishness.
Neogi mark themselves and those they capture
through the use of dyes, transformational magic,
and other markings intended to signify rank,
achievements, and the identity of the individual’s
leader. By these signs, neogi can identify each oth­
ers’ place in the hierarchy—and they must defer to
those of higher station or risk harsh punishment.
Neogi Master
Neogi masters use magic, as a result of a pact be­
tween neogi and aberrant entities they met during
their journey from their home world. These enti­
ties—known by such names as Acamar, Caiphon,
Gibbeth, and Hadar—resemble stars and embody
the essence of evil.
--col--
Neogi Hatchling
Tiny Aberration, Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 7 (3d4)
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
3 (-4) 13 (+1) 10 (+0) 6 (-2) 10 (+0) 9 (-1)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages —
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Mental Fortitude. The neogi has advantage on saving throws
against being charmed or frightened, and magic can’t put the
neogi to sleep.
Spider Climb. The neogi can climb difficult surfaces, includ­
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 3 (1 d4 + 1) piercing damage plus 3 (1 d6) poison damage,
and the target must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving
throw or become poisoned for 1 minute. A target can repeat
the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the ef­
fect on itself on a success.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 191

=== PAGE 192 ===
Neogi
Small Aberration, Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 33 (6d6 + 12)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
6 (-2) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 12 (+1) 15 (+2)
Skills Intimidation +4, Perception +3
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Common, Deep Speech, Undercommon
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Mental Fortitude. The neogi has advantage on saving throws
against being charmed or frightened, and magic can’t put the
neogi to sleep.
Spider Climb. The neogi can climb difficult surfaces, includ­
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Actions
Multiattack. The neogi makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (1 d6 + 3) piercing damage plus 14 (4d6) poison damage,
and the target must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving
throw or become poisoned for 1 minute. A target can repeat
the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the ef­
fect on itself on a success.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) slashing damage.
Bonus Actions
Enslave (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The neogi
targets one creature it can see within 30 feet of it. The target
must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or be magically
charmed by the neogi for 1 day, or until the neogi dies or is
more than 1 mile from the target. The charmed target obeys
the neogi’s commands and can't take reactions, and the neogi
and the target can communicate telepathically with each other
at a distance of up to 1 mile. Whenever the charmed target
takes damage, it can repeat the saving throw, ending the effect
on itself on a success.
192 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Neogi Master
Medium Aberration (Warlock), Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 71 (lld8 + 22)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
6 (-2) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 12 (+1) 18 (+4)
Saving Throws Wis +3
Skills Arcana +5, Deception +6, Intimidation +6, Perception +3,
Persuasion +6
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Common, Deep Speech, Undercommon,
telepathy 30 ft.
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the neogi’s
darkvision.
Mental Fortitude. The neogi has advantage on saving throws
against being charmed or frightened, and magic can't put the
neogi to sleep.
Spider Climb. The neogi can climb difficult surfaces, includ­
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Actions
Multiattack. The neogi makes one Bite attack and one Claw
attack, or it makes two Tentacle of Hadar attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (1 d6 + 3) piercing damage plus 14 (4d6) poison damage,
and the target must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving
throw or become poisoned for 1 minute. A target can repeat
the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the ef­
fect on itself on a success.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) piercing damage.
Tentacle of Hadar. Ranged Spell Attack: +6 to hit, range 120 ft.,
one target. Hit: 14 (3d6 + 4) necrotic damage, and the target
can’t take reactions until the end of the neogi’s next turn, as a
spectral tentacle clings to the target.
Spellcasting. The neogi casts one of the following spells, using
Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 14):
At will: guidance, mage hand, minor illusion, prestidigitation
1/day each: dimension door, hold person, hunger of Hadar
Bonus Actions
Enslave (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The neogi
targets one creature it can see within 30 feet of it. The target
must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or be magically
charmed by the neogi for 1 day, or until the neogi dies or is
more than 1 mile from the target. The charmed target obeys
the neogi’s commands and can’t take reactions, and the neogi
and the target can communicate telepathically with each other
at a distance of up to 1 mile. Whenever the charmed target
takes damage, it can repeat the saving throw, ending the effect
on itself on a success.

=== PAGE 193 ===
Neothelid
Gargantuan Aberration, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 232 (15d20+ 75)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
27 (+8) 7 (-2) 21 (+5) 3 (-4) 16 (+3) 12 (+1)
Saving Throws Int +1, Wis +8, Cha +6
Senses blindsight 120 ft. (blind beyond this radius), passive
Perception 13
Languages —
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Creature Sense. The neothelid is aware of the presence of crea­
tures within 1 mile of it that have an Intelligence score of 4 or
higher. It knows the distance and direction to each creature,
as well as each creature’s Intelligence score, but can’t sense
anything else about it. A creature protected by a mind blank
spell, a nondetection spell, or similar magic can’t be perceived
in this manner.
Magic Resistance. The neothelid has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 21 (3d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage plus 11 (2dl0) psy­
chic damage. If the target is a Large or smaller creature, it must
succeed on a DC 18 Strength saving throw or be swallowed by
the neothelid. A swallowed creature is blinded and restrained,
it has total cover against attacks and other effects outside the
neothelid, and it takes 21 (6d6) acid damage at the start of
each of the neothelid’s turns.
If the neothelid takes 30 damage or more on a single turn
from a creature inside it, the neothelid must succeed on a DC
18 Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or regurgi­
tate all swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a space within
10 feet of the neothelid. If the neothelid dies, a swallowed
creature is no longer restrained by it and can escape from the
corpse by using 20 feet of movement, exiting prone.
Acid Breath (Recharge 5-6). The neothelid exhales acid in a 60-
foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 18 Dex­
terity saving throw, taking 35 (10d6) acid damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Spellcasting (Psionics). The neothelid casts one of the following
spells, requiring no spell components and using Wisdom as
the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 16):
At will: levitate
1/day each: confusion, feeblemind, telekinesis
--col--
Neothelid
A slime-covered worm of immense size, a neo­
thelid is the result of the mind flayer reproductive
cycle gone horribly wrong. When an illithid colony
collapses, typically after an external assault, and
the elder brain (appears in this book) is killed, the
colony’s tadpoles are suddenly freed from their fate.
They no longer serve as food—and are no longer fed
by their caretakers. Driven by hunger, they turn to
devouring one another. Only one tadpole survives
out of the thousands in the colony’s pool, and it
emerges as a neothelid.
Neothelids know nothing beyond their predatory
existence. They prowl subterranean passages, using
their rudimentary psionic abilities to search out and
incapacitate brains to sate their constant hunger,
growing ever more vicious. These creatures can
spray tissue-dissolving enzymes from their tentacle
ducts, reducing victims to puddles of slime and leav­
ing only the pulsing brains unharmed. They have no
knowledge of their link to illithids, so they’re just as
likely to prey on mind flayers as on anything else.
Mind flayers consider neothelids dangerous abom­
inations—normally they eat or destroy any tadpoles
that grow larger than a few inches in length without
being implanted in a brain so they can’t become
such threats. Neothelids are not intelligent enough
for elder brains to detect, so mind flayers are always
alert for signs of their presence and organize hunt­
ing parties to exterminate any of these murderous
worms they learn of.
