as a fighting platform for up to four
Small people. Ogre howdahs are most
often seen bearing bow- and spear-wield­
ing goblins into battle, or perhaps ko-
bolds or deep gnomes (all three appear
in the Monster Manual), but they might
also transport other Small folk.
Ogre Chain Brute
Large Ciant, Typically Chaotic Evil
ArmorClassll (hide armor)
Hit Points 59 (7dl0 + 21)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19(4-4) 8 (-1) 16 (+3) 5 (-3) 7 (-2) 7 (-2)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages Common, Giant
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach ft., one target. Hit: 9
(2d4 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Chain Smash (Recharge 6). Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit,
reach 10 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage,
and the target must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving
throw or be stunned for 1 minute. The target repeats the saving
throw if it takes damage and at the end of each of its turns,
ending the effect on itself on a success.
Chain Sweep. The ogre swings its chain, and each creature
within 10 feet of it must make a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw.
On a failed saving throw, a creature takes 8 (1 d8 + 4) bludgeon­
ing damage and is knocked prone. On a successful save, the
creature takes half as much damage and isn’t knocked prone.
--col--
Ogre Howdah
Large Ciant, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 15 (breastplate, shield)
Hit Points 59 (7dl0 + 21)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 8 (-1) 16 (+3) 5 (-3) 7 (-2) 7 (-2)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages Common, Giant
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Howdah. The ogre carries a compact fort on its back. Up to
four Small creatures can ride in the fort without squeezing. To
make a melee attack against a target within 5 feet of the ogre,
they must use spears or weapons with reach. Creatures in the
fort have three-quarters cover against attacks and effects from
outside it. If the ogre dies, creatures in the fort are placed in
unoccupied spaces within 5 feet of the ogre.
Actions
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 2OI

=== PAGE 202 ===
OlNOLOTH
Grim specters of death, oinoloths bring pestilence
wherever they go. When armies recognize their aw­
ful forms, their mere appearance causes soldiers to
break ranks and flee, lest they succumb to one of the
awful plagues that oinoloths let loose.
Oinoloths solve thorny problems by killing ev­
eryone involved. They are typically hired as a last
resort when a siege has gone on too long or an
army has proven too strong to overcome. Once sum­
moned, oinoloths stalk the killing field, poisoning
the ground and sickening creatures they encoun­
ter. Sometimes they might be hired to lift the very
plagues they spread, but the price for such work is
high, and the effort turns the creatures they save
into debilitated wrecks.
OlNOLOTH
Medium Fiend (Yugoloth), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 119 (14d8 + 56)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 17 (+3) 18 (+4) 17 (+3) 16 (+3) 19 (+4)
Saving Throws Con +8, Wis +7
Skills Deception +8, Intimidation +8, Perception +7
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities acid, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft.,
passive Perception 17
Languages Abyssal, Infernal, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Magic Resistance. The oinoloth has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The oinoloth makes two Claw attacks, and it uses
Spellcasting or Teleport.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 14 (3d6 + 4) slashing damage plus 22 (4dl0) ne­
crotic damage.
Corrupted Healing (Recharge 6). The oinoloth touches one
willing creature within 5 feet of it. The target regains all its
hit points. In addition, the oinoloth can end one disease on
the target or remove one of the following conditions from it:
------------------- ■ ... ■ ._■■■■ ... , ■ -Z
202 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
y
blinded, deafened, paralyzed, or poisoned. The target then
gains 1 level of exhaustion, and its hit point maximum is re­
duced by 7 (2d6). This reduction can be removed only by a wish
spell or by casting greater restoration on the target three times
within the same hour. The target dies if its hit point maximum
is reduced to 0.
Spellcasting. The oinoloth casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 16):
At will: darkness, detect magic, dispel magic, hold monster, invisi­
bility (self only)
1/day each: feeblemind, globe of invulnerability
Teleport. The oinoloth teleports, along with any equipment it
is wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space
it can see.
Bonus Actions
Bringer of Plagues (Recharge 5-6). The oinoloth blights the
area in a 30-foot-radius sphere centered on itself. The blight
lasts for 24 hours. While the area is blighted, all normal plants
there wither and die.
Furthermore, when a creature moves into the blighted area
or starts its turn there, that creature must make a DC 16 Con­
stitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 14
(4d6) poison damage and is poisoned. On a successful save,
the creature is immune to the oinoloth's Bringer of Plagues for
the next 24 hours.
The poisoned creature can’t regain hit points. After every 24
hours that elapse, the poisoned creature can repeat the saving
throw. On a failed save, the creature’s hit point maximum is
reduced by 5 (IdlO). This reduction lasts until the poison ends,
and the target dies if its hit point maximum is reduced to 0.
The poison ends after the creature successfully saves against it
three times.

=== PAGE 203 ===
Orcus is the Demon Prince of Undeath, also known O
as the Blood Lord. While he takes pleasure in the w
sufferings of the living, he far prefers the company r
and service of Undead. His desire is to see all life N
quenched and the multiverse transformed into a e
vast necropolis populated solely by Undead crea­ b
tures under his command. w
Orcus rewards those who spread death in his m
name by granting them a small portion of his power. w
The least of these become ghouls and zombies (both
L
appear in the Monster Manual) that serve in his
O
legions, while his favored servants are the cultists
c
and necromancers who murder the living and then
ta
manipulate the dead, emulating their dread master.
Orcus is a bestial creature of corruption with a D
diseased, decaying look. He has the lower torso of a
goat and a humanlike upper body with a belly swol­
len with rot. Great bat wings sprout from his shoul­
ders, and his head is like the skull of a goat, the
flesh nearly rotted from it. In one hand, he wields G
the legendary Wand of Orcus, which is described in
the Dungeon Master’s Guide.
--col--
Orcus makes his lair in the fortress city of Naratyr,
which is on Thanatos, the layer of the Abyss that he
rules. Surrounded by a moat fed by the River Styx,
Naratyr is an eerily quiet and cold city, its streets
empty for hours at a time. The central castle of
bone has interior walls of flesh and carpets made of
woven hair. The city contains wandering Undead,
many of which are engaged in continuous battles
with one another.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), Orcus
can take one of the following lair actions; he can’t
ake the same lair action two rounds in a row:
Deadly Utterance. Orcus’s voice booms throughout
the lair. His utterance causes one creature of his
choice to be subjected to power word kill. Orcus
needn’t see the creature, but he must be aware
that the individual is in the lair.
Grasp of the Dead. Orcus causes skeletal arms
to rise from an area on the ground in a 20-foot
square that he can see. They last until the next
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 203

=== PAGE 204 ===
initiative count 20. Each creature in that area
when the arms appear must succeed on a DC 23
Strength saving throw or be restrained until the
arms disappear or until Orcus releases them (no
action required).
Undead Servants. Orcus causes up to six corpses
within the lair to rise as skeletons, zombies, or
ghouls (all appear in the Monster Manual). These
Undead obey his telepathic commands, which can
reach anywhere in the lair.
Regional Effects
The region containing Orcus’s lair is warped by his
magic, creating one or more of the following effects:
Charnel Realm. The air is filled with the stench of
rotting flesh, and buzzing flies grow thick within
the region.
Undead Beasts. Dead Beasts periodically animate
as Undead mockeries of their former selves. Skel­
..............- ■ .............. ■ - - -.............'
Orcus
Huge Fiend (Demon), Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor), 20 with the Wand of Orcus
Hit Points 405 (30dl2 + 210)
Speed 40 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
27 (+8) 14 (+2) 25 (+7) 20 (+5) 20 (+5) 25 (+7)
Saving Throws Dex +10, Con +15, Wis +13
Skills Arcana +12, Perception +12
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing that is nonmagical
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 22
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 26 (90,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +8
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Orcus fails a saving throw, he
can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Orcus has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Master of Undeath. Orcus can cast animate dead (at will) and
create undead (3/day). He chooses the level at which the spells
are cast, and the creatures created by them remain under his
control indefinitely. Additionally, he can cast create undead
even when it isn’t night.
Special Equipment. Orcus wields the Wand of Orcus.
Actions
Multiattack. Orcus makes three Wand of Orcus, Tail, or Ne­
crotic Bolt attacks.
Wand of Orcus. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, reach 10 ft.,
one target. Hit: 24 (3d8 + 11) bludgeoning damage plus 13
(2dl2) necrotic damage.
204 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
etal and zombie versions of local wildlife are com­
monly seen in the area.
If Orcus dies, these effects fade over the course of
Id 10 days.
Cultists of Orcus
Orcus grants his rank-and-file cultists the Undying
Soul trait, and his cult leaders can gain the Aura of
Death trait.
Undying Soul (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If this
creature is reduced to 0 hit points, it immediately makes a DC
10 Constitution saving throw. If it succeeds, it is instead re­
duced to 1 hit point.
Aura of Death. This creature emanates a deathly aura that
extends 30 feet in every direction from its space while it isn’t
incapacitated. The aura is blocked by total cover. While in the
aura, the creature and any friendly Undead are immune to the
frightened condition and have resistance to radiant damage.
Enemies have disadvantage on death saving throws while
in the aura.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 21 (3d8 + 8) force damage plus 9 (2d8) poison damage.
Necrotic Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +15 to hit, range 120 ft., one
target. Hit: 29 (5d8 + 7) necrotic damage.
Conjure Undead (1/Day). While holding the Wand of Orcus,
Orcus conjures Undead creatures whose combined average
hit points don’t exceed 500. These creatures magically rise
up from the ground or otherwise form in unoccupied spaces
within 300 feet of Orcus and obey his commands until they are
destroyed or until he dismisses them as an action.
Spellcasting. Orcus casts one of the following spells, requiring
no material components and using Charisma as the spellcast­
ing ability (spell save DC 23):
At will: detect magic
3/day: dispel magic
1/day: time stop
Wand Spellcasting. While holding the Wand of Orcus, Orcus
casts one of the following spells (spell save DC 18), some of
which require charges; the wand has 7 charges to fuel these
spells, and it regains 1 d4 + 3 charges daily at dawn:
At will: animate dead (as an action), blight, speak with dead
1 charge each: circle of death, finger of death
2 charges: power word kill
Legendary Actions
Orcus can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the options
below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a time
and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Orcus regains
spent legendary actions at the start of his turn.
Attack. Orcus makes one Tail or Necrotic Bolt attack.
Creeping Death (Costs 2 Actions). Orcus chooses a point on
the ground that he can see within 100 feet of him. A cylinder
of swirling necrotic energy 60 feet tall and with a 10-foot
radius rises from that point and lasts until the end of Or­
cus’s next turn. Creatures in that area have vulnerability to
necrotic damage.

=== PAGE 205 ===
Orthon
When an archduke of the Nine Hells needs a crea­
ture tracked, found, and either done away with or
captured, the task usually falls to an orthon. These
devils are infernal bounty hunters, tireless in their
pursuit of their quarry across the multiverse.
Orthons are infamous for their sharp senses.
Because an orthon can become invisible at will, its
quarry is often unaware of being hunted until the or­
thon strikes. This invisibility can be disrupted when
the devil is attacked, however, so a strong counterat­
tack is often the best defense against it.
Orthons value the challenge of the chase and the
thrill of one-on-one combat above all else. An or-
thon’s first loyalty is to its archduke, but one with no
immediate assignment might work for anyone who
promises it a worthy struggle against a lethal foe.
Because they travel widely, orthons are unequaled
as guides through the layers of the Nine Hells.
Orthon
Large Fiend (Devil), Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 17 (half plate)
Hit Points 105 (10dl0 + 50)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
22 (+6) 16 (+3) 21 (+5) 15 (+2) 15 (+2) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +9, Wis +6
Skills Perception +10, Stealth +11, Survival +10
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., truesight 30 ft.,
passive Perception 20
Languages Common, Infernal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Magic Resistance. The orthon has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Infernal Dagger. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 11 (2d4 + 6) force damage, and the target must
make a DC 17 Constitution saving throw, taking 22 (4dl0) poi­
son damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a suc­
cessful one. On a failure, the target is also poisoned for 1 min­
ute. The poisoned target can repeat the saving throw at the end
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Brass Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range
100/400 ft., one target. Hit: 14 (2dl0 + 3) force damage.
The target also suffers one of the following effects of the
orthon’s choice; the orthon can’t use the same effect two
rounds in a row;
_____________ 1 :---------...............................................................................
--col--
Acid. The target must make a DC 17 Constitution saving throw,
taking 17 (5d6) acid damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one.
Blindness. The target takes 5 (1 d 10) radiant damage. In addi­
tion, the target and each creature within 20 feet of it must
succeed on a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw or be blinded un­
til the end of the orthon’s next turn.
Concussion. The target and each creature within 20 feet of
it must make a DC 17 Constitution saving throw, taking 13
(2dl 2) thunder damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one.
Entanglement. The target must succeed on a DC 17 Dexterity
saving throw or be restrained for 1 hour by strands of sticky
webbing. The target can escape by taking an action to make a
DC 17 Strength or Dexterity check and succeeding.
Paralysis. The target takes 22 (4dl0) lightning damage and
must succeed on a DC 17 Constitution saving throw or be
paralyzed for 1 minute. The paralyzed target can repeat the
saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect
on itself on a success.
Tracking. For the next 24 hours, the orthon knows the direction
and distance to the target, as long as it’s on the same plane
of existence. If the target is on a different plane, the orthon
knows which one, but not the exact location there.
Bonus Actions
Invisibility Field (Recharge 4-6). The orthon becomes invisible.
Any equipment it wears or carries is also invisible as long as
the equipment is on its person. This invisibility ends immedi­
ately after it makes an attack roll or is hit by an attack roll.
Reactions
Explosive Retribution. In response to dropping to 15 hit points
or fewer, the orthon explodes. All other creatures within 30 feet
of it must each make a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw, taking
9 (2d8) fire damage plus 9 (2d8) thunder damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. The orthon,
its infernal dagger, and its brass crossbow are destroyed.
.. .................... 11 11 • ....................+
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 205

=== PAGE 206 ===
Phoenix
Releasing a phoenix from the Inner Planes creates
an explosion of fire that spreads across the sky.
An enormous fiery bird forms in the center of the
flames and smoke—an elder Elemental possessed
by a need to burn everything to ash. The phoenix
rarely stays in one place for long as it strives to
transform the world into an inferno.
Phoenix
Cargantuan Elemental, Typically Neutral
Armor Class 18
Hit Points 175 (10d20+ 70)
Speed 20 ft., fly 120 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 26 (+8) 25 (+7) 2 (-4) 21 (+5) 18 (+4)
Saving Throws Wis +10, Cha +9
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed,
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, stunned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages —
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Fiery Death and Rebirth. If the phoenix dies, it explodes. Each
creature in 60-foot-radius sphere centered on the phoenix
must make a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw, taking 22 (4dl0)
fire damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a suc­
cessful one. The fire ignites flammable objects in the area that
aren’t being worn or carried.
The explosion destroys the phoenix’s body and leaves behind
an egg-shaped cinder, which weighs 5 pounds. The cinder
deals 21 (6d6) fire damage to any creature that touches it,
though no more than once per round. The cinder is immune to
all damage, and after 1 d6 days, it hatches a new phoenix.
Fire Form. The phoenix can move through a space as narrow as
1 inch wide without squeezing.
Any creature that touches the phoenix or hits it with a melee
206 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
attack while within 5 feet of it takes 5 (IdlO) fire damage. In
addition, the phoenix can enter a hostile creature’s space and
stop there. The first time it enters a creature’s space on a turn,
that creature takes 5 (IdlO) fire damage.
With a touch, the phoenix can also ignite flammable objects
that aren’t being worn or carried (no action required).
Flyby. The phoenix doesn't provoke opportunity attacks when
it flies out of an enemy’s reach.
Illumination. The phoenix sheds bright light in a 60-foot radius
and dim light for an additional 60 feet.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the phoenix fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Siege Monster. The phoenix deals double damage to objects
and structures.
Actions
Multiattack. The phoenix makes one Beak attack and one Fiery
Talons attack.
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) fire damage.
Fiery Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
target. Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) fire damage.
Legendary Actions
The phoenix can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The
phoenix regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Move. The phoenix moves up to its speed.
Peck. The phoenix makes one Beak attack.
Swoop (Costs 2 Actions). The phoenix moves up to its speed
and makes one Fiery Talons attack.
____ -.....;___________________

=== PAGE 207 ===
Quickling
Quicklings rocket through twisted forests
where the unseelie fey hold sway, both in
the Feywild and in the world. These slen­
der Fey resemble miniature elves with feral
features and cold eyes that
gleam like jewels. Racing
faster than the eye can track,
they appear as little more
than blurry waverings in the air.
Quicklings owe their existence—and their plight—
to the Queen of Air and Darkness, the dread ruler
of the Gloaming Court. Once a species of lazy and
egotistical Fey, quicklings’ predecessors were late
in answering the queen’s summons one time too
many. To hasten their pace and teach them to mind
her will, the queen sped up their internal clocks and
shrank them. Her curse gave quicklings amazing
speed but also accelerated their passage through
life—no quickling lives longer than fifteen years.
The mortal realm is a ponderous place to a quick-
ling’s eye: a hurricane creeps gradually across the
sky, a torrent of rain drifts earthward like lazy snow­
flakes, lightning crawls in a meandering path from
cloud to cloud. The slow and boring world seems to
be populated by torpid creatures whose deep, moo­
ing speech lacks meaning.
To other creatures, quicklings seem blindingly
fast, vanishing into an indistinct blur as they move.
Their cruel laughter is a burst of rapid staccato
sounds, their speech a shrill squeal. Only when
quicklings deliberately slow down, which they prefer
not to do, can other beings properly see, hear, and
comprehend them. Never truly at rest, “stationary”
