a Medium or smaller creature. Until the grapple ends, the
target is restrained, and the shadar-kai can’t grapple an­
other target.
5-6: Topple. The target is knocked prone.
Bonus Actions
Shadow Jump. The shadar-kai teleports, along with any equip­
ment is it wearing or carrying, up to 30 feet to an unoccupied
space it can see. Both the space it teleports from and the space
it teleports to must be in dim light or darkness.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 213

=== PAGE 214 ===
I Shadar-kai Soul Monger
Medium Humanoid (Elf), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 15 (studded leather)
Hit Points 136 (21d8 + 42)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
8 (-1) 17 (+3) 14 (+2) 19 (+4) 15 (+3) 13 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Wis +7, Cha +5
Skills Perception +7
Damage Immunities necrotic, psychic
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 17
Languages Common, Elvish
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Fey Ancestry. The shadar-kai has advantage on saving throws
against being charmed, and magic can’t put it to sleep.
Magic Resistance. The shadar-kai has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Soul Thirst. When it reduces a creature to 0 hit points, the
shadar-kai can gain temporary hit points equal to half the
214 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
creature’s hit point maximum. While the shadar-kai has tempo­
rary hit points from this trait, it has advantage on attack rolls.
Weight of Ages. Any Beast or Humanoid (except an elf) that
starts its turn within 5 feet of the shadar-kai has its speed re­
duced by 20 feet until the start of that creature’s next turn.
Actions
Multiattack. The shadar-kai makes two Shadow Dagger attacks.
Shadow Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit,
reach 5 ft. or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (4d4 + 3) pierc­
ing damage plus 19 (3dl2) necrotic damage, and the target has
disadvantage on saving throws until the end of the shadar-kai’s
next turn. Hit or Miss: The dagger magically returns to the sha­
dar-kai’s hand immediately after a ranged attack.
Spellcasting. The shadar-kai casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Intelligence as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 16):
1/day each: bestow curse, finger of death, gaseous form, seeming
Wave of Weariness (Recharge 4-6). The shadar-kai emits wea­
riness in a 60-foot cube. Each creature in that area must make
a DC 16 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a creature
takes 45 (10d8) psychic damage and suffers 1 level of exhaus­
tion. On a successful save, it takes half as much damage and
doesn’t gain a level of exhaustion.

=== PAGE 215 ===
Shadow Mastiffs
Shadow mastiffs—hounds of the Shadowfell—move
invisibly through the shadows, always on the hunt.
Shadow Mastiff
Shunning sunlight, these hounds are usually met as
a pack. Some faiths devoted to deities of gloom and
night, such as that of Shar in the Forgotten Realms,
perform unholy rites to summon shadow mastiffs to
work as temple sentinels and bodyguards.
Shadow Mastiff Alpha
Each pack of shadow mastiffs is led by an alpha, the
smartest one of the group. The sound of an alpha’s
howl strikes terror into those who hear it and is a
sure sign that a pack is on the prowl.
Shadow Mastiff Alpha
Medium Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 44 (8d8 + 8)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 6 (-2) 12 (+1) 5 (-3)
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +6
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical attacks while in dim light or darkness
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages —
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Ethereal Awareness. The shadow mastiff can see ethereal crea­
tures and objects.
Sunlight Weakness. While in bright light created by sunlight,
the shadow mastiff has disadvantage on attack rolls, ability
checks, and saving throws.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Terrifying Howl (Recharge 6). The shadow mastiff howls. Any
Beast or Humanoid within 300 feet of it must succeed on a DC
11 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened of it for 1 minute. A
frightened target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each
of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a target’s
save is successful or the effect ends for it, the target is immune
to any shadow mastiff's Terrifying Howl for the next 24 hours.
Bonus Actions
Shadow Blend. While in dim light or darkness, the shadow
mastiff becomes invisible, along with anything it is wearing or
carrying. The invisibility lasts until the shadow mastiff uses a
bonus action to end it or until the shadow mastiff attacks, is in
bright light, or is incapacitated.
--col--
Medium Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 5 (-3) 12 (+1) 5 (-3)
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +6
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical attacks while in dim light or darkness
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Ethereal Awareness. The shadow mastiff can see ethereal crea­
tures and objects.
Sunlight Weakness. While in bright light created by sunlight,
the shadow mastiff has disadvantage on attack rolls, ability
checks, and saving throws.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Bonus Actions
Shadow Blend. While in dim light or darkness, the shadow
mastiff becomes invisible, along with anything it is wearing or
carrying. The invisibility lasts until the shadow mastiff uses a
bonus action to end it or until the shadow mastiff attacks, is in
bright light, or is incapacitated.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 215

=== PAGE 216 ===
Trust MonAenkaiiAeK to look <Aowia oia
AkMj Sort o| companionship—even
the slavering venomouS/ demonic
puppy kind
TASHA
Shoosuva
A shoosuva is a hyena-demon gifted by Yeenoghu
(appears in this book) to an especially powerful
worshiper (typically a fang of Yeenoghu; see the
Monster Manual). A shoosuva manifests shortly
after a Yeenoghu-worshiping war band achieves a
great victory, emerging from a billowing, fetid cloud
of smoke as it arrives from the Abyss. In battle, the
demon wraps its slavering jaws around one victim
while lashing out with the poisonous stinger on its
tail to bring down another. A creature immobilized
by the poison becomes easy pickings for any nearby
members of the war band.
Each shoosuva is bonded to a particular wor­
shiper of Yeenoghu and fights alongside its master.
A gnoll that has been gifted with a shoosuva is sec­
ond only to a flind (appears in this book) in status
within a war band dedicated to Yeenoghu.
216 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Shoosuva
Large Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 136 (16dl0 + 48)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 13 (+1) 17 (+3) 7 (-2) 14 (+2) 9 (-1)
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +6, Wis +5
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Abyssal, Cnoll, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Actions
Multiattack. The shoosuva makes one Bite attack and one Tail
Stinger attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
26 (4dl0 + 4) piercing damage.
Tail Stinger. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
creature. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage, and the target
must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw or become
poisoned. While poisoned in this way, the target is also para­
lyzed. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each
of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Bonus Actions
Rampage. When it reduces a creature to 0 hit points with a
melee attack on its turn, the shoosuva can move up to half its
speed and make one Bite attack.

=== PAGE 217 ===
SlBRIEX
Thought to be as old as the Abyss itself, sibriexes
haunt remote parts of that plane, where they use
their vile abilities to create new horrors and they
seek ancient lore. Rivulets of blood and bile cascade
from a sibriex’s body, polluting the surrounding
landscape.
Sibriexes have spent eons amassing knowledge
from across the planes, hoarding it for when it
SlBRIEX
Huge Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 150 (12dl2+ 72)
Speed 0 ft., fly 20 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
10 (+0) 3 (-4) 23 (+6) 25 (+7) 24 (+7) 25 (+7)
Saving Throws I nt +13, Cha +13
Skills Arcana +13, History +13, Perception +13
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 23
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 18 (20,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +6
Contamination. The sibriex emits an aura of corruption 30
feet in every direction. Vegetation withers in the aura, and the
ground in the aura is difficult terrain for other creatures. Any
creature that starts its turn in the aura must succeed on a DC
20 Constitution saving throw or take 14 (4d6) poison damage.
A creature that succeeds on the save is immune to this sibriex’s
Contamination for 24 hours.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the sibriex fails a saving throw,
it can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. The sibriex has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The sibriex makes three Chain attacks, and it uses
Squirt Bile.
Chain. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 20 (2dl2 + 7) force damage.
Squirt Bile. The sibriex targets one creature it can see within
120 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 20 Dexterity
saving throw or take 31 (9d6) acid damage.
Spellcasting. The sibriex casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 21):
At will: command, dispel magic, hold monster
yday.feeblemind
--col--
Warp Creature. The sibriex targets up to three creatures it can
see within 120 feet of it. Each target must make a DC 20 Consti­
tution saving throw. On a successful save, a creature becomes
immune to this sibriex’s Warp Creature. On a failed save, the
target is poisoned, which causes it to also gain 1 level of ex­
haustion. While poisoned in this way, the target must repeat
the saving throw at the start of each of its turns. Three suc­
cessful saves against the poison end it, and ending the poison
removes any levels of exhaustion caused by it. Each failed save
causes the target to gain another level of exhaustion. Once the
target reaches 6 levels of exhaustion, it dies and instantly trans­
forms into a living manes (see the Monster Manual) under the
sibriex’s control. The transformation of the body can be undone
only by a wish spell.
Legendary Actions
The sibriex can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op­
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a
time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The sibriex
regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Cast a Spell. The sibriex uses Spellcasting.
Spray Bile. The sibriex uses Squirt Bile.
Warp (Costs 2 Actions). The sibriex uses Warp Creature.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 217

=== PAGE 218 ===
might be useful. Such are their incredible intellects
and stores of information that many seek them out,
including demon lords. Some sibriexes act as advi­
sors and oracles, manipulating demons into serving
their ends, while others parcel out lore only when
doing so advances their plans.
Sibriexes can channel the power of the Abyss to
create new demons from other creatures. Some
demons petition sibriexes for physical gifts, for
sibriexes can graft on new body parts to give the
demons greater strength, vision, or stamina. Si­
briexes never give aid freely, though; they demand a
service or a treasure in return for the flesh-shaping
they provide.
VARIANT: FLESH WARPING
Creatures that encounter a sibriex can be twisted
beyond recognition. Whenever a creature fails a sav­
ing throw against the sibriex’s Warp Creature effect,
you can roll percentile dice and consult the Flesh
Warping table to determine an additional effect,
which vanishes when Warp Creature ends on the
creature. If the creature transforms into a manes,
the effect becomes a permanent feature of that body.
A creature can willingly submit to flesh warping,
an agonizing process that takes at least 1 hour
while the creature stays within 30 feet of the sibriex.
At the end of the process, roll once on the table (or
choose one effect) to determine how the creature is
transformed permanently.
--col--
Flesh Warping
dlOO Effect
01-05 The color of the target’s hair, eyes, and skin be­
comes blue, red, yellow, or patterned.
06-10 The target’s eyes push out of its head at the end
of stalks.
11-15 The target’s hands grow claws, which can be
used as daggers.
16-20 One of the target’s legs grows longer than the
other, reducing its walking speed by 10 feet.
21-25 The target’s eyes become beacons, filling a 15-
foot cone with dim light when they are open.
26-30 A pair of wings, either feathered or leathery,
sprout from the target’s back, granting it a flying
speed of 30 feet.
31-35 The target’s ears tear free from its head and
scurry away; the target is deafened.
36-40 Two of the target’s teeth turn into short tusks.
41-45 The target’s skin develops bark-like scales,
granting it a +1 bonus to AC but reducing its
Charisma score by 2 (to a minimum of 1).
46-50 The target’s arms and legs switch places, pre­
venting the target from moving unless it crawls.
51-55 The target’s arms become tentacles with fingers
on the ends, increasing its reach by 5 feet.
56-60 The target’s legs grow incredibly long and
springy, increasing its walking speed by 10 feet.
61-65 The target grows a long, thin tail, which it can
use as a whip.
66-70 The target’s entire eyes turn black, and it gains
darkvision out to a range of 120 feet.
71-75 The target swells, tripling its weight.
76-80 The target becomes thin and skeletal, halving its
weight.
81-85 The target’s head triples in size.
86-90 The target’s ears become wings, giving it a flying
speed of 5 feet.
91-95 The target’s body becomes unusually brittle,
causing the target to have vulnerability to blud­
geoning, piercing, and slashing damage.
96-00 The target grows another head, causing it to
have advantage on saving throws against being
charmed, frightened, or stunned.

=== PAGE 219 ===
S
kulk
Skulks are the soulless shells of travelers who
became lost in the Shadowfell, wandering its gray
wastes until they lost all sense of self. They are so
devoid of identity that they have become perma­
nently invisible. Only children can see a skulk with­
out the help of a mirror or a special candle. On the
rare occasions when a skulk is visible, it appears as
a drab, featureless, hairless biped.
A skulk can be summoned from the Shadowfell by
performing a ritual, and it is bound to obey the sum-
moner’s commands for 30 days. During this time, if
the skulk is visible, an astute observer might deduce
who summoned it, because the skulk assumes a
vague likeness of its master.
Cruel and chaotic, skulks carry out their orders
in the most violent manner possible. A summoned
skulk can’t return to the Shadowfell until it dies, so
many throw themselves into creating bloodshed and
mayhem with no regard for their own lives.
After killing a person on the Material Plane, some
skulks take up a silent imitation of that person’s
life. In extreme cases, skulks have invaded villages,
killed all the occupants, and turned the places into
seeming ghost towns where flavorless food is pre­
pared daily, colorless clothes are hung up to dry, and
livestock is shifted from pen to pen until it starves.
--col--
'., 1 ...............- ;..
Skulk
Medium Monstrosity, Typically Chaotic Neutral
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 18 (4d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
6 (-2) 19 (+4) 10 (+0) 10 (+0) 7 (-2) 1 (-5)
Saving Throws Con +2
Skills Stealth +8
Condition Immunities blinded
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages understands Common but can’t speak
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Fallible Invisibility. The skulk is invisible. This invisibility can be
circumvented by three things:
Charnel Candles. The skulk appears as a dim, translucent form
in the light of a candle made of fat rendered from a corpse
whose identity is unknown.
Children. Humanoid children, aged 10 and under, can see
through this invisibility.
Reflective Surfaces. The skulk appears as a drab, smooth­
skinned biped if its reflection can be seen in a mirror or on
another surface.
Trackless. The skulk leaves no tracks to indicate where it has
been or where it’s headed.
Actions
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (1 d4 + 4) slashing damage plus 3 (1 d6) necrotic damage.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 219

=== PAGE 220 ===
Skull Lord
Skull lords have claimed vast regions of the Shad­
owfell as their dominion. From these blighted lands,
they wage war against their rivals, commanding
hordes of the undying in a bid to establish domi­
nance. Yet skull lords always prove to be their
own worst enemies; each is a combined being
born from three hateful individuals, and they con­
stantly plot against themselves.
Infighting and treachery brought skull lords into
existence. The first of them appeared in the after­
math of Veena’s bid to conquer the world of Grey­
hawk, after the vampire Kas betrayed Veena and
took his eye and hand. In the confusion resulting
from this turn of events, Veena’s warlords turned
against each other, and his plans were dashed. In a
rage, Veena gathered up his generals and captains
and bound them in groups of three, fusing them into
abominations cursed to fight among themselves for
all time. Since the first skull lords were exiled into
the shadows, others have arisen, typically created
from other leaders who betrayed their masters.
Skull Lord
Medium Undead (Sorcerer), Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 18 (plate)
Hit Points 112 (15d8 + 45)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 16 (+3) 17 (+3) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 21 (+5)
Skills Athletics +7, History +8, Perception +12, Stealth +8
Damage Resistances cold, necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion,
frightened, poisoned, stunned, unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 22
Languages all the languages it knew in life
Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Evasion. If the skull lord is subjected to an effect that allows it
to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half the damage,
the skull lord instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the
saving throw and only half damage if it fails, provided it isn’t
incapacitated.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the skull lord fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Master of the Crave. While within 30 feet of the skull lord, any
Undead ally of the skull lord makes saving throws with advan­
tage, and that ally regains 1 d6 hit points whenever it starts its
turn there.
Unusual Nature. The skull lord doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
220 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Actions
Multiattack. The skull lord makes three Bone Staff or Deathly
Ray attacks.
Bone Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (1 d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 21 (6d6) ne­
crotic damage.
Deathly Ray. Ranged Spell Attack: +10 to hit, range 60 ft., one
target. Hit: 27 (5d8 + 5) necrotic damage.
Spellcasting. The skull, lord casts one of the following spells,
using Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 18):
At will: mage hand, message
2/day each: dimension door, fear
1/day each: cloudkill, cone of cold
Legendary Actions
The skull lord can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be
used at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn.
The skull lord regains spent legendary actions at the start
of its turn.
Attack. The skull lord makes one Bone Staff or Deathly
Ray attack.
Move. The skull lord moves up to its speed without provoking
opportunity attacks.
Summon Undead (Costs 2 Actions). The skull lord summons
up to five skeletons or zombies (both appear in the Monster
Manual) in unoccupied spaces within 30 feet of it. They
remain until destroyed. Undead summoned in this way roll
initiative, act in the next available turn, and obey the skull
lord. The skull lord can have no more than five Undead sum­
moned by this ability at a time.

=== PAGE 221 ===
Slithering Tracker
Medium Ooze, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 19 (+4) 15 (+2) 10 (+0) 14 (+2) 11 (+0)
