Eye Ray. The mindwitness shoots one magical eye ray at ran­
dom (roll a d6, and reroll if the ray has already been used this
turn), choosing one target it can see within 120 feet of it:
1: Aversion Ray. The targeted creature must make a DC 13
Charisma saving throw. On a failed save, the target has dis­
advantage on attack rolls for 1 minute. The target can repeat
the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the
effect on itself on a success.
2: Fear Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 13
Wisdom saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. The
target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
3: Psychic Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 13 Intelligence
saving throw or take T1 (6d8) psychic damage.
4: Slowing Ray. The targeted creature must make a DC 13
Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the target’s speed
is halved for 1 minute. In addition, the creature can’t take
reactions, and it can take either an action or a bonus action
on its turn but not both. The creature can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on
itself on a success.
5: Stunning Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC
13 Constitution saving throw or be stunned for 1 minute. The
target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
6: Telekinetic Ray. If the target is a creature, it must make a DC
13 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the mindwitness
moves it up to 30 feet in any direction, and it is restrained by
the ray's telekinetic grip until the start of the mindwitness’s
next turn or until the mindwitness is incapacitated.
If the target is an object weighing 300 pounds or less that
isn’t being worn or carried, it is telekinetically moved up to
30 feet in any direction. The mindwitness can also exert fine
control on objects with this ray, such as manipulating a sim­
ple tool or opening a door or a container.
r*1 . 2. .3. 14 5 6 ... ■ ........................
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY l8l

=== PAGE 182 ===
Moloch
Exiled from the Nine Hells, Moloch would do
anything to reclaim his position. Long ago, Mo­
loch earned his place among the other archdevils
through the glory he won driving demons out of the
Nine Hells. Asmodeus rewarded him by elevating
him to the rulership of Malbolge.
For eons, Moloch ruled his domain, vying against
the other archdevils as he sought still greater power.
This animosity worked in Asmodeus’s favor, since
Asmodeus knew that Moloch’s scheming helped
keep the other archdevils in check. The arrange­
ment unraveled, however, when Moloch took the
night hag named Malagard for his advisor. Her poi­
sonous words gradually convinced him to attempt to
topple Asmodeus. The conspiracy nearly succeeded,
but was ultimately thwarted. Moloch was stripped of
his station and sentenced to death—only the timely
use of a planar portal allowed him to escape.
Moloch wasted no time in preparing for his return.
He amassed an army of devils and monsters and
left them to make final preparations for invading the
Nine Hells, while he ventured to the Material Plane
in search of an artifact that would ensure his suc­
cess. But while there, he became trapped, leaving
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
his armies at the mercy of his enemies. They were
destroyed in short order.
Moloch was rendered nearly powerless by this fail­
ure. He schemes of ways to reclaim his former sta­
tus, but every time he enters the Nine Hells, he is de­
moted to an imp (see the Monster Manual) and can’t
regain his normal powers until he leaves. Thus, he
lives a split existence, sometimes plotting in Mal­
bolge or other layers of the Hells and at other times
wandering the planes in search of magical might or
secrets that might help him win back his title.
Rumors suggest that he can often be found in
Sigil, where he bargains with yugoloths to build yet
another army with which he might invade Malbolge
and wrest the throne from Glasya. Bereft as he is,
he has little to offer in exchange, so he might bar­
gain with mortals to gain their aid in acquiring coin,
jewels, and other riches in return for knowledge
about the Nine Hells and the other planes.
Most of Moloch’s cultists have switched allegiance
to one of the other archdevils, but idols constructed
to honor him still stand in deep dungeons, their
jeweled eyes and the remnants of power they hold
drawing monstrous worshipers and unwise adven­
turers into places where his foul influence remains.

=== PAGE 183 ===
Moloch
Large Fiend (Devil), Lawful Evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 253 (22dl0+ 132)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
26 (+8) 19 (+4) 22 (+6) 21 (+5) 18 (+4) 23 (+6)
Saving Throws Dex +11, Con +13, Wis +11, Cha +13
Skills Deception +13, Intimidation +13, Perception +11
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 21
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 21 (33,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Moloch fails a saving throw,
he can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Moloch has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Regeneration. Moloch regains 20 hit points at the start of his
turn. If he takes radiant damage, this trait doesn’t function at
the start of his next turn. Moloch dies only if he starts his turn
with 0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate.
Actions
Multiattack. Moloch makes one Bite attack, one Claw attack,
and one Many-Tailed Whip attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 26 (4d8 + 8) fire damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) force damage.
- 1........................................11
--col--
Many-Tailed Whip. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach
30 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (2d4 + 8) lightning damage plus 11
(2dl 0) thunder damage. If the target is a creature, it must suc­
ceed on a DC 24 Strength saving throw or be pulled up to 30
feet in a straight line toward Moloch.
Breath of Despair (Recharge 5-6). Moloch exhales in a 30-foot
cube. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 21
Wisdom saving throw or take 27 (5dl0) psychic damage, drop
whatever it is holding, and become frightened of Moloch for
1 minute. While frightened in this way, a creature must take
the Dash action and move away from Moloch by the safest
available route on each of its turns, unless there is nowhere
to move, in which case it needn’t take the Dash action. If the
creature ends its turn in a location where it doesn’t have line of
sight to Moloch, the creature can repeat the saving throw, end­
ing the effect on itself on a success.
Spellcasting. Moloch casts one of the following spells, requir­
ing no material components and using Charisma as the spell­
casting ability (spell save DC 21):
At will: alter self (can become Medium when changing his ap­
pearance), confusion, detect magic, fly, major image, stinking
cloud, suggestion, wall of fire
Teleport. Moloch teleports, along with any equipment he is
wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to an unoccupied space
he can see.
Legendary Actions
Moloch can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op­
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at
a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Moloch
regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn.
Attack. Moloch makes one Bite, Claw, or Many-Tailed
Whip attack.
Teleport. Moloch uses Teleport.
Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). Moloch uses Spellcasting.

=== PAGE 184 ===
Huge Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 216 (16dl2+ 112)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
28 (+9) 22 (+6) 25 (+7) 21 (+5) 24 (+7) 24 (+7)
Saving Throws Str +16, Con +14, Wis +14, Cha +14
Skills Perception +21
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened,
poisoned, stunned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 31
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 21 (33,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the molydeus fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. The molydeus has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Actions____________________________
Multiattack. The molydeus makes one Demonic Weapon at­
tack, one Snakebite attack, and one Wolf Bite attack.
Demonic Weapon. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 15
ft., one target. Hit: 35 (4dl 2 + 9) force damage. If the target has
at least one head and the molydeus rolled a 20 on the attack
j84 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Molydeus
The fearsome molydeus speaks for the demon lord
it serves and enforces its master’s will. This demon
is 12 feet tall, and its bipedal body has a slavering
wolfs head and a fanged serpent’s head. Its demon
lord can speak and see through the serpent head;
this master also uses the molydeus to guard trea­
sures, slay foes, and terrify troops into obedience.
A molydeus’s demon lord bestows on it a powerful
weapon that dissolves if the molydeus dies. The
weapon’s form varies depending on the creator, but
that doesn’t affect the weapon’s capabilities.
Variant^Demon Summoning
You can give a molydeus the ability to summon
other demons.
Summon Demon (1/Day). As an action, the molydeus has a
50 percent chance of summoning its choice of 1 d6 babaus
(also in this book), 1 d4 chasmes, or one marilith (the chasme
and marilith appear in the Monster Manual) A summoned
demon appears in an unoccupied space within 60 feet of the
molydeus, acts as an ally of the molydeus, and can’t summon
other demons. It remains for 1 minute, until it or the molydeus
dies, or until the molydeus dismisses it as an action.
roll, the target is decapitated and dies if it can’t survive without
that head. A target is immune to this effect if it takes none of
the damage, has legendary actions, or is Huge or larger. Such a
creature takes an extra 27 (6d8) force damage from the hit.
Snakebite. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
creature. Hit: 16 (2d6 + 9) poison damage. The target must
succeed on a DC 22 Constitution saving throw, or its hit point
maximum is reduced by an amount equal to the damage taken.
This reduction lasts until the target finishes a long rest. The
target transforms into a manes (see the Monster Manual) if this
reduces its hit point maximum to 0. This transformation can be
ended only by a wish spell.
Wolf Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 25 (3dl0 + 9) necrotic damage.
Spellcasting. The molydeus casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 22):
At will: dispel magic, polymorph, telekinesis, teleport
3/day: lightning bolt
Legendary Actions
The molydeus can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be
used at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn.
The molydeus regains spent legendary actions at the start
of its turn.
Attack. The molydeus makes one Demonic Weapon or Snake­
bite attack.
Move. The molydeus moves without provoking opportu­
nity attacks.
Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). The molydeus uses Spellcasting.

=== PAGE 185 ===
Morkoth
Ancient and devious, morkoths are voracious col­
lectors. Each one floats through the planes on a
strange, mobile island, amassing the valuables,
oddities, and castoffs of the multiverse in a massive,
ever-growing collection.
The first morkoths arose in the Astral Plane when
the petrified body of a deity of greed and strife col­
lided with a remnant of celestial matter imbued with
life-giving magic. The collision released a storm of
chaotic energy and sent countless islands spinning
away into the void. Within some of them, bits of the
god’s petrified flesh came back to life as morkoths:
tentacled monstrosities brimming with malice
and greed.
Morkoths are driven by greed and selfishness
mixed with a yearning for conflict. They hoard vast
stores of treasure, knowledge, and captives on their
islands. Some of these prisoners are the descen­
dants of people captured generations before; they
might know of no other world outside their island.
A morkoth may allow a visitor to bargain for some­
thing or someone it has claimed if that visitor offers
the morkoth something it desires more. It shows no
mercy, however, to those who break a deal or try to
steal from it. A morkoth knows every person and
object in its collection.
A morkoth’s island has the qualities of a dream­
scape. It holds a jumble of objects and creatures the
morkoth has collected, some of which date from for­
gotten times. An island might have natural-looking
illumination, but most are shrouded in twilight, and
on any of them, mists and shadows can appear with­
out notice. The environment is warm and wet, a sub­
tropical or tropical climate that keeps the morkoth
and its “guests” comfortable.
Each island glides on planar currents and is safe
from most harmful external effects—one could
float in the skies of Avernus in the Nine Hells with­
out harm to it or its residents. A morkoth’s island
might be found anywhere from the bottom of the
ocean to the void of the Astral Plane. Anything on
or within a certain distance of a morkoth’s isle is
drawn with it in its journey through the planes.
Thus, people from lost civilizations and creatures or
objects from bygone ages might be found within a
morkoth’s dominion.
Some islands travel a specific route, arriving
at the same destinations regularly over a cycle of
years. Others are tied to a particular place or group
of locales, and still others move erratically through
the cosmos. Occasionally, a morkoth learns to direct
its island’s movement.
--col--
A Morkoth’s Lair
A morkoth claims dominion over an entire island,
and it also maintains a central sanctum on that
isle. This lair is most often a twisted network of
narrow tunnels that connect several underground
chambers, although other structural forms might
be incorporated. The morkoth dwells among the
creatures and objects it prizes most in a spacious
vault at the center of the warren, where the celestial
fragments that make up the island’s core are also
located. Sections of the lair and its center might
be kept dry to better protect and preserve col­
lected objects and creatures, but most of the lair is
underwater.
A morkoth encountered in its lair has a challenge
rating of 12 (8,400 XP).
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the
morkoth can take one of the following lair actions:
Cast a Spell. The morkoth casts darkness, dispel
magic, or misty step, using Intelligence as its spell­
casting ability and without expending a spell slot.
Hypnotize. The morkoth uses its Hypnosis action,
originating at a point within 120 feet of itself. It
doesn’t need to see the effect’s point of origin.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY ^5

=== PAGE 186 ===
Regional Effects
The island surrounding a morkoth’s lair is warped
by the creature’s presence, creating the follow­
ing effects:
Alter Water. With a thought (no action required),
the morkoth can initiate a change in the water
within its lair that takes effect 1 minute later. The
water can be as breathable and clear as air, or
it can be normal water (ranging in clarity from
murky to clear).
Locate Creatures and Objects. The morkoth is
aware of any new arrival, whether an object or
a creature, on its island or in its sanctum. As an
action, the morkoth can locate any one creature
or object on the island. Visitors to the island feel
as though they are being watched, even when
they aren’t.
Lost Possessions. Each time a creature that has
been on the island for less than a year finishes
a short or long rest, it must make a DC 10 Intel­
ligence saving throw. On a failure, the creature
has misplaced one possession (chosen by the
player, if the creature is that player’s character).
The possession remains nearby but concealed
for a short time, so it can be recovered with a
"......
Morkoth
Large Aberration, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 165 (22dl0 + 44)
Speed 25 ft., swim 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 20 (+5) 15 (+2) 13 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Int +9, Wis +6
Skills Arcana +9, History +9, Perception +10, Stealth +6
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive
Perception 20
Languages telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) Proficiency Bonus+4
Amphibious. The morkoth can breathe air and water.
Actions
Multiattack. The morkoth makes either two Bite attacks and
one Tentacles attack or three Bite attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) slashing damage plus 10 (3d6) psy­
chic damage.
Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
target. Hit: 15 (3d8 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 14) if it is a Large or smaller creature. Un­
til this grapple ends, the target is restrained and takes 15 (3d8
—-
!86 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check. An
object that is misplaced but not recovered ends up
in the morkoth’s lair 1 hour later. If the creature
later goes to the morkoth’s lair, its lost posses­
sions stand out in its perception and are easily
recovered.
Supernatural Lure. Entrances to the morkoth’s
lair have an enchantment that the morkoth can
activate or suppress at any time while it’s in its lair
and not incapacitated. Any creature within 30 feet
of such an entrance and able to see it must make a
DC 15 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the
creature feels an intense urge to use its movement
on each of its turns to enter the lair and to move
toward the morkoth’s location (the target doesn’t
realize it’s heading toward a creature). The target
moves toward the morkoth by the most direct
route. As soon as it can see the morkoth, the tar­
get can repeat the saving throw, ending the effect
on itself on a success. It can also repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns and every
time it takes damage.
If the morkoth dies, these regional effects end
immediately.
. ....................................................................................................................................................;
+ 2) bludgeoning damage at the start of each of its turns, and
the morkoth can’t use its tentacles on another target.
Hypnosis. The morkoth projects a 30-foot cone of magical
energy. Each creature in that area must make a DC 17 Wisdom
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is charmed by the
morkoth for 1 minute. While charmed in this way, the target
tries to get as close to the morkoth as possible, using its ac­
tions to Dash until it is within 5 feet of the morkoth. A charmed
target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns and whenever it takes damage, ending the effect on itself
on a success. If a creature’s saving throw is successful or the
effect ends for it, the creature has advantage on saving throws
against the morkoth’s Hypnosis for 24 hours.
Spellcasting. The morkoth casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Intelligence as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 17):
At will: detect magic, mage hand
3/day each: darkness, dimension door, dispel magic, lightning
bolt, sending
Reactions
Spell Reflection. If the morkoth makes a successful saving
throw against a spell or a spell attack misses it, the morkoth
can choose another creature (including the spellcaster) it can
see within 120 feet of it. The spell targets the chosen creature
instead of the morkoth. If the spell forced a saving throw, the
chosen creature makes its own save. If the spell was an attack,
the attack roll is rerolled against the chosen creature.

=== PAGE 187 ===
Mouth of Grolantor
Hill giants consume spoiled food and diseased car­
casses with as much enthusiasm as children eating
dessert and rarely suffer for such eating habits.
When one of their kind becomes incapable of keep­
ing down food, that giant is seen, among hill giant
worshipers of the god Grolantor, as the vessel of a
message from the deity.
The sickened giant’s compatriots separate the
giant from the rest of the community, often trapping
them in a cage or tying them to a post. A priest of
Grolantor visits the famished giant daily, trying to
read portents in the puddles of bile the hill giant
retches up. If the sickness soon passes, they allow
the hill giant to rejoin society. If not, the hill giant is
instead starved to the point of desperation so Gro-
lantor’s hunger can be given a mouth in the world.
A mouth of Grolantor is revered as a holy embodi­
ment of Grolantor's aching hunger. Unlike a typical
sluggish hill giant, a mouth of Grolantor is thin as
a whippet, alert like a bird, and constantly twitchy.
Mouths are kept perpetually imprisoned or shack­
led; if they break free, they’re sure to kill anyone
nearby before they’re brought down or escape on
a killing spree. The only time mouths of Grolantor
are set loose is during a war, during a raid against
an enemy settlement, or in a last-ditch defense of
Grolantor’s faithful. When a mouth of Grolantor has
slaughtered and eaten their fill of enemies, they pass
out amid the gory remains of their victims, making
them easy to recapture.
Mouth of Grolantor
Huge Ciant (Hill Giant), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 105 (10dl2 + 40)
Speed 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
21 (+5) 10 (+0) 18 (+4) 5 H) 7 (-2) 5 (-3)
Skills Perception +1
Condition Immunities frightened
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages Giant
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Mouth of Chaos. The giant is immune to the confusion spell.
On each of its turns, the giant uses all its movement to move
toward the nearest creature or whatever else it might perceive
as food. Roll a diO at the start of each of the giant’s turns to
determine its action for that turn:
--col--
.. J
................—........ ........... r - — . _■■■■■
1-3: The giant makes three Fist attacks against one random
creature within reach. If no creatures are within reach, the
giant flies into a rage and gains advantage on all attack rolls
until the end of its next turn.
4-5: The giant makes one Fist attack against each creature
within reach. If no creatures are within reach, the giant makes
one Fist attack against itself.
6-7: The giant makes one Bite attack against one random
creature within reach. If no other creatures are within reach,
its eyes glaze over and it is stunned until the start of its
next turn.
8-10: The giant makes one Bite attack and two Fist attacks
against one random creature within reach. If no creatures are
within reach, the giant flies into a rage and gains advantage
