Attack. Juiblex makes one Acid Lash attack.
Corrupting Touch (Costs 2 Actions). Melee Weapon Attack: +14
to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature. Hit: 21 (4d6 + 7) poison
damage, and the target is slimed. Until the slime is scraped
off with an action, the target is poisoned, and any creature,
other than an Ooze, is poisoned while within 10 feet of
the target.

=== PAGE 161 ===
Ki-rin
Ki-rins are noble, celestial creatures. In the Outer
Planes, ki-rins in service to benevolent deities take
a direct role in the eternal struggle between good
and evil. In the mortal world, ki-rins are celebrated
far and wide as harbingers of destiny, guardians of
the sacred, and counterbalances to the forces of evil.
Ki-rins are an embodiment of good, and simply be­
holding one can evoke fear or awe in an observer. A
typical ki-rin looks like a muscular stag, covered in
golden scales lined in some places with golden fur.
It has a long mane and tail, coppery cloven hooves,
and a spiral-shaped coppery horn just above and be­
tween its luminous violet eyes. In a breeze or when
aloft, the creature’s scales and hair appear to blaze
with a holy, golden fire.
Beyond their coloration, ki-rins vary in appear­
ance based on the deity each one reveres and the
function each typically performs in service to that
god. Some resemble gigantic unicorns; these are
often used as guardians. Others have draconic
features and tend to be aggressive foes of evil.
Having one horn is most common, but a par­
ticularly fierce ki-rin might have two horns
or a set of antlers like those of a great stag.
In many lands, common folk view ki-rins as
heralds of good fortune. They consider seeing
a ki-rin fly overhead a blessing and events that hap­
pen on such a day especially auspicious. If a ki-rin
alights during a ceremony such as a birth announce­
ment or a coronation, everyone present understands
that the creature is telling them the person so hon­
ored could become a great force for good. Ki-rins
have also been known to appear at the sites of great
battles to inspire and strengthen the side of good or
to rescue heroes from certain death.
Ki-rins are attracted to the worship of deities of
courage, loyalty, selflessness, and truth, as well as
to the advancement of just societies. For instance, in
the Forgotten Realms, ki-rins rally mostly to Torm,
although they also serve his allies Tyr and Ilmater.
Ki-rins that serve good deities go wherever they are
commanded; a ki-rin from an Upper Plane might
venture to the Material Plane on a mission, usually
as a scout, a messenger, or a spy. A ki-rin living on
the Material Plane claims a territory to watch over,
and one ki-rin might safeguard an area that encom­
passes several nations.
Lair of Luxury
On the celestial planes, ki-rins reside in lofty, ele­
gant aeries filled with luxurious objects. On the Ma­
terial Plane, a ki-rin chooses a similar location for
its lair, such as atop a tall pinnacle or within a cloud
solidified by the ki-rin’s magic. The chosen location
--col--
is almost always hard to reach, and only those mor­
tals who have the tenacity to complete the daunting
journey to a ki-rin’s lair can prove themselves wor­
thy of speaking with its occupant. Many of those
who do end up pledging service to the creature.
They study under its tutelage in its lair and serve as
its agents in the world. These followers might travel
incognito across the land, seeking news of growing
evil and working behind the scenes, or they might
be champions of their master’s cause, out to defeat
villainy wherever it is found.
When viewed from the outside, a ki-rin’s lair is in­
distinguishable from a natural site, and the entrance
is difficult for visitors to find and reach. Inside, the
lair is a serene and comfortable place, its ambiance
a mix between palace and temple. If the ki-rin has
taken creatures into its service, its lair doubles as a
sacred site wherein the ki-rin not only rests but also
teaches of holy mysteries.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY

=== PAGE 162 ===
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), a ki-
rin can take one of the following lair actions, and it
must finish a long rest before taking the chosen lair
action again:
Create Comforts. The ki-rin conjures up one or
more permanent objects made of soft, plant-based
material—including manufactured objects like pil­
lows, rope, blankets, and clothing—that can collec­
tively fill no more than a 20-foot cube. The objects
materialize 1 minute later in unoccupied spaces of
the ki-rin’s choice on the floor of the lair.
Create Stone and Metal. The ki-rin conjures up one
or more temporary objects made of stone or metal
that can collectively fill no more than a 2-foot
cube. The objects materialize 1 minute later in un­
occupied spaces of the ki-rin’s choice on the floor
of the lair, and the objects vanish after 1 hour.
Create Wood. The ki-rin conjures up one or more
permanent objects made of wood, or similarly
hard plant-based material, that can collectively fill
no more than a 10-foot cube. The objects materi­
alize 1 minute later in unoccupied spaces of the
ki-rin’s choice on the floor of the lair.
Ki-rin
Large Celestial, Typically Lawful Good
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 153 (18dl0 + 54)
Speed 60 ft., fly 120 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
21 (+5) 16 (+3) 16 (+3) 19 (+4) 20 (+5) 20 (+5)
Skills Perception +9, Insight +9, Religion +8
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., truesight 30 ft., passive Perception 19
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the ki-rin fails a saving throw,
it can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. The ki-rin has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The ki-rin makes two Hoof attacks and one Horn
attack, or it makes two Sacred Fire attacks.
...........-.................
!62 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Regional Effects
A ki-rin’s Celestial nature transforms the region
around its lair. Any of the following magical effects
is possible for travelers to encounter in the vicinity:
Blessed Nature. Beasts, Plants, and Celestials
within 3 miles of the ki-rin’s lair grow more vigor­
ous as they evolve toward an idealized form. Such
creatures are rarely aggressive toward others that
aren’t normally prey.
Controlled Weather. A ki-rin can cast control
weather while it is within 3 miles of its lair. The
spell’s point of origin is always the point outdoors
closest to the center of its lair. The ki-rin doesn’t
need to maintain a clear path to the sky or to con­
centrate for the change in weather to persist.
Pure Waters. Water flows pure within 3 miles of a
ki-rin’s lair. Any purposeful corruption of the wa­
ter lasts for no longer than 3 minutes.
Realm of Respite. Curses, diseases, and poisons on
creatures are suppressed when those creatures
are within 3 miles of the lair, unless the creatures
are Aberrations, Fiends, or Undead.
Safe Descents. Within 3 miles of the lair, winds
buoy creatures that fall due to no act of the ki-rin
or its allies. Such creatures descend at a rate of 60
feet per round and take no falling damage. Aberra­
tions, Fiends, and Undead don’t gain this benefit,
falling as normal.
When the ki-rin dies, all these effects disappear im­
mediately, although the invigorating effect on flora
and fauna remains for 3 years.
Hoof. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d4 + 5) force damage.
Horn. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) radiant damage.
Sacred Fire. Ranged Spell Attack: +9 to hit, range 120 ft., one
target. Hit: 18 (3d8 + 5) radiant damage.
Spellcasting. The ki-rin casts one of the following spells, requir­
ing no material components and using Wisdom as the spell­
casting ability (spell save DC 17):
At will: light, major image (6th-level version), thaumaturgy
3/day each: cure wounds, dispel magic, lesser restoration, sending
1/day each: banishment, calm emotions, create food and water,
greater restoration, plane shift, protection from evil and good,
revivify, wind walk
Legendary Actions
The ki-rin can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op­
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at
a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The ki-rin
regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Move. The ki-rin moves up to half its speed without provoking
opportunity attacks.
Smite. The ki-rin makes one Hoof, Horn, or Sacred Fire attack.

=== PAGE 163 ===
Kobold Dragonshield
Kobold dragonshields are champions of their peo­
ple. Almost all dragonshields begin life as normal
kobolds, then are chosen by a dragon and invested
with power for the purpose of protecting the drag­
on’s eggs, but once every few years a kobold hatches
with an innate version of the dragonshield’s abili­
ties. In either case, a dragonshield is skilled at hand-
to-hand combat and bears a shield made of dragon
scales, as well as scars from desperate fights.
Dragonshields know they have a place of honor
among those who venerate dragons, but—being ko­
bolds at heart—most of them feel unworthy of their
status and are desperate to prove themselves de­
serving of it. But they also have the ability to rally in
the face of certain death, inspiring others to follow
them into battle.
--col--
Skills Perception +1
Damage Resistances see Dragon’s Resistance below
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Dragon's Resistance. The kobold has resistance to a type of
damage based on the color of dragon that invested it with
power (choose or roll a diO): 1—2, acid (black or copper); 3-4,
cold (silver or white); 5-6, fire (brass, gold, or red); 7-8, light­
ning (blue or bronze); 9-10, poison (green).
Heart of the Dragon. If the kobold is frightened or paralyzed by
an effect that allows a saving throw, it can repeat the save at the
start of its turn to end the effect on itself and all kobolds within
30 feet of it. Any kobold that benefits from this trait (including
the dragonshield) has advantage on its next attack roll.
Pack Tactics. The kobold has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the kobold’s allies is within 5
feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kobold has disadvan­
tage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) checks
that rely on sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The kobold makes two Spear attacks.
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1 d6 + 1) piercing damage : •
5 (1 d8 + 1) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a
melee attack.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY

=== PAGE 164 ===
KoboldInventor
A kobold inventor builds improvised weapons to
gain an advantage in combat. These weapons last
for only one or two attacks before they break and
typically work only for the inventor, but they might
be surprisingly effective in the meantime. The weap­
ons don’t have to be lethal—often one serves its pur­
pose if it distracts, scares, or confuses a creature
long enough for the inventor to kill that foe.
KoboldInventor
Small Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 13 (3d6 + 3)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
7 (-2) 15 (+2) 12 (+1) 14 (+2) 10 (+0) 8 (-1)
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Pack Tactics. The kobold has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the kobold’s allies is within 5
feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated.
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kobold has disadvan­
tage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) checks
that rely on sight.
Actions
Dagger. Melee or Ranged V/eapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1 d4 + 2) piercing damage.
Sling. Ranged V/eapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1 d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage.
V/eapon Invention. The kobold uses one of the following op­
tions (choose one or roll a d8); the kobold can use each one no
more than once per day:
1: Acid. The kobold hurls a flask of acid. Ranged V/eapon Attack:
+4 to hit, range 5/20 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (2d6) acid damage.
2: Alchemist’s Fire. The kobold throws a flask of alchemist’s
fire. Ranged V/eapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 5/20 ft., one
target. Hit: 2 (1 d4) fire damage at the start of each of the
target’s turns. The target can end this damage by using
its action to make a DC 10 Dexterity check to extinguish
the flames.
3: Basket of Centipedes. The kobold throws a small basket into
a 5-foot-square space within 20 feet of it. A swarm of insects
(centipedes; see the Monster Manual) with 11 hit points
emerges from the basket and rolls initiative. At the end of
each of the swarm’s turns, there’s a 50 percent chance that
the swarm disperses.
4: Green Slime Pot. The kobold throws a clay pot full of green
slime at the target, and it breaks open on impact. Ranged
V/eapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 5/20 ft., one target. Hit: 5
(IdlO) acid damage, and the target is covered in slime until
a creature uses its action to scrape or wash the slime off. A
target covered in the slime takes 5 (IdlO) acid damage at the
start of each of its turns.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
5: Rot Grub Pot. The kobold throws a clay pot into a 5-foot-
square space within 20 feet of it, and it breaks open on im­
pact. A swarm of rot grubs (in this book) emerges from the
shattered pot and remains a hazard in that square.
6: Scorpion on a Stick. The kobold makes a melee attack with
a scorpion (see the Monster Manual) tied to the end of a
5-foot-long pole. Melee V/eapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5
ft., one target. Hit: 1 piercing damage, and the target must
:
make a DC 9 Constitution saving throw, taking 4 (1 d8) poi­
son damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
7: Skunk in a Cage. The kobold releases a skunk into an unoccu­
pied space within 5 feet of it. The skunk has a walking speed
of 20 feet, AC 10, 1 hit point, and no effective attacks. It rolls
initiative and, on its turn, uses its action to spray musk at a
random creature within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed
on a DC 9 Constitution saving throw, or it retches and is
incapacitated for 1 minute. The target can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on
itself on a success. A creature that doesn’t need to breathe
or is immune to poison automatically succeeds on the saving
throw. Once the skunk has sprayed its musk, it can’t do so
again until it finishes a short or long rest.
8: Wasp Nest in a Bag. The kobold throws a small bag into a
5-foot-square space within 20 feet of it. A swarm of insects
(wasps; see the Monster Manual) with 11 hit points emerges
from the bag and rolls initiative. At the end of each of the
swarm's turns, there’s a 50 percent chance that the swarm
disperses.

=== PAGE 165 ===
Kobold Scale Sorcerer
Kobold scale sorcerers have an innate talent
for arcane magic, making them highly valuable
members of their communities. These sor­
cerers typically fill the role of advisor, and
when threatened, a scale sorcerer lashes
out with coloful magic.
A scale sorcerer who resides in or near
a dragon’s lair may serve as that dragon’s
diplomat and mouthpiece—anticipating the
dragon’s needs, issuing commands to others
on the dragon’s behalf, and reporting in­
formation back to the dragon. Such scale
sorcerers often wear artificial wings, which
are a sign of their draconic office. Scale
sorcerers are just as awed by and respectful of drag­
ons as others who venerate these mighty creatures,
but they know that duty requires them not to fawn
over their master at all times. They also understand
that their frequent proximity to their dragon master
means they would probably be the first to die if their
master became angry or displeased, so they fran­
tically maintain a balance between adoration and
terror in their behavior toward their master.
Kobold Scale Sorcerer
Small Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 27 (5d6+10)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
7 (-2) 15 (+2) 14 (+2) 10 (+0) 9 (-1) 14 (+2)
Skills Arcana +2, Medicine +1
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages Common, Draconic
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Pack Tactics. The kobold has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the kobold’s allies is within
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
___ _________ __________ .—_ ...
--col--
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kobold has disad­
vantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Multiattack. The kobold makes two Dagger or Chromatic Bolt
attacks. It can replace one attack with a use of Spellcasting.
Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft.
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Chromatic Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +4 to hit, range 60 feet,
one target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) of a type of the kobold’s choice:
acid, cold, fire, lightning, poison, or thunder.
Spellcasting. The kobold casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 12):
At will: mage hand, prestidigitation
2/day each: charm person, fog cloud, levitate
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY jgc

=== PAGE 166 ===
Korred
Korreds are unpredictable, secretive Fey with
strong ties to earth and stone. Because of their mag­
ical hair and mystical understanding of minerals,
they are sought after by treasure-hunting dwarves
and others who desire wealth beneath the earth.
Korreds prefer to keep their own company but
occasionally consort with creatures of elemental
earth such as galeb duhr (see the Monster Manual').
They often gather with other korreds to perform cer­
emonial dances, beating out rhythms on stone with
their hooves and clubs. In the depths of the Material
Plane, korreds typically flee from other creatures,
but they become aggressive when they feel insulted
or are annoyed by the sounds of mining.
Korreds can hurl boulders far larger than it seems
they should be able to, shape stone as though it were
clay, and swim through rock. They also gain super­
natural strength just from standing on the ground.
Magical Hair
Korreds have hair all over their bodies, but the hair
that grows from their heads is magical. When cut,
it transforms into whatever material was used to
cut it. Korreds use iron shears to cut lengths of this
magical hair, then twist the strands together to cre­
ate iron ropes that they can manipulate, animating
them to bind or snake around creatures and objects.
Korreds take great pride in their hair and equally
great offense at anyone who attempts to cut it with­
out permission.
166 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Korred
Small Fey, Typically Chaotic Neutral
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 93 (11d6 + 55)
Speed 30 ft., burrow 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
23 (+6) 14 (+2) 20 (+5) 10 (+0) 15 (+2) 9 (-1)
Skills Athletics +9, Perception +5, Stealth +5
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical attacks
Senses darkvision 120 ft., tremorsense 120 ft.,
passive Perception 15
Languages Dwarvish, Gnomish, Sylvan, Terran, Undercommon
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Stone Camouflage. The korred has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain.
Actions
Multiattack. The korred makes two Greatclub or Rock attacks.
Creatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (1 d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage, or 19 (3d8 + 6)
bludgeoning damage if the korred is on the ground.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 60/120 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (1 d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage, or 19 (3d8 + 6)
bludgeoning damage if the korred is on the ground.
Spellcasting. The korred casts one of the following spells,
requiring no spell components and using Wisdom as the spell­
casting ability (spell save DC 13):
At will: commune with nature (as an action), meld into stone,
stone shape
1/day: Otto’s irresistible dance
Bonus Actions
Command Hair. The korred has at least one 50-foot-long rope
woven out of its hair. The korred commands one such rope
within 30 feet of it to move up to 20 feet and entangle a Large
or smaller creature that the korred can see. The target must
succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw or become grappled
by the rope (escape DC 13). Until this grapple ends, the target
is restrained. The korred can use a bonus action to release
the target, which is also freed if the korred dies or becomes
incapacitated.
A rope of korred hair has AC 20 and 20 hit points. It regains
1 hit point at the start of each of the korred’s turns while the
rope has at least 1 hit point and the korred is alive. If the rope
drops to 0 hit points, it is destroyed.
:------------- . . —l------------------------------ .. :.................. _j

=== PAGE 167 ===
Kraken Priest
A kraken can seem godlike to folk who have faced
its fury. Those who mistake its might for divine
power and those who seek to appease the monster
through veneration are sometimes rewarded with
power, to serve thereafter as kraken priests.
Every kraken priest undergoes a change in ap­
pearance that reflects the kraken’s influence, al­
though each one differs in how their reverence is
displayed. One kraken priest might have ink-black
eyes and a suckered tentacle for a tongue, while
another has a featureless face and a body covered
in eyes and mouths that dribble seawater. These
horrific manifestations intensify when the kraken
possesses its minion to utter dire pronouncements.
Kraken Priest
Medium Monstrosity, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 75 (10d8 + 30)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
12 (+1) 10 (+0) 16 (+3) 10 (+0) 15 (+2) 14 (+2)
Skills Perception +5
Senses passive Perception 15
Languages any two languages
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Amphibious. The priest can breathe air and water.
Actions
Multiattack. The priest makes two Thunderous Touch or
Thunderbolt attacks.
Thunderous Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 27 (5dl0) thunder damage.
Thunderbolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 60 ft., one
target. Hit: 11 (2dl0) lightning damage plus 11 (2dl0)fthunder
damage, and the target is knocked prone.
Spellcasting. The priest casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Wisdom as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 13):
