A firbolg’s magic is an obscuring sort, which al­
lowed their ancestors to pass through a forest with­
out disturbing it. So deep is the connection between
a firbolg and the wild places of the world that they
can communicate with flora and fauna.
Firbolgs can live up to 500 years.
--col--
Firbolg Traits
As a firbolg, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Firbolg Magic. You can cast the detect magic and
disguise self spells with this trait. When you use this
version of disguise self, you can seem up to 3 feet
shorter or taller. Once you cast either of these spells
with this trait, you can’t cast that spell with it again
until you finish a long rest. You can also cast these
spells using any spell slots you have.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for these spells when you cast them
with this trait (choose when you select this race).
Hidden Step. As a bonus action, you can magi­
cally turn invisible until the start of your next turn
or until you attack, make a damage roll, or force
someone to make a saving throw. You can use this
trait a number of times equal to your proficiency
bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you
finish a long rest.
Powerful Build. You count as one size larger
when determining your carrying capacity and the
weight you can push, drag, or lift.
Speech of Beast and Leaf. You
have the ability to communicate in a lim­
ited manner with Beasts, Plants, and
vegetation. They can understand
the meaning of your words,
though you have no special
ability to understand them in
return. You have advantage
on all Charisma
checks you make
to influence them.
As a childl, I learned ihai playing hide-
and-seek wi+h disappearing jirbol^s is
|un |u+ile.
TASHA
CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES 15

=== PAGE 16 ===
Left to Right: Earth Genasi, Water
Genasi
Tracing their ancestry to the genies of the Elemental
Planes, each genasi can tap into the power of one of
the elements. Air, earth, fire, and water—these are
the four pillars of the Material Plane and the four
types of genasi. Some genasi are direct descendants
of a genie, while others were born to non-genasi
parents who lived near a place suffused by a ge­
nie’s magic.
A typical genasi has a life span of 120 years.
Air Genasi Traits
Air genasi are descended from djinn, the genies of
the Elemental Plane of Air. Embodying many of the
airy traits of their otherworldly ancestors, air genasi
can draw upon their connection to the winds.
Air genasi’s skin tones include many shades
of blue, along with the full range of human skin
tones, with bluish or ashen casts. Sometimes their
skin is marked by lines that seem like cracks with
bluish-white energy spilling out. An air genasi’s hair
might blow in a phantom wind or be made entirely
of clouds or vapor.
As an air genasi, you have the following traits.
jg CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
r Genasi, Fire Genasi, ano Air Genasi
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium or Small. You choose the
size when you select this race.
Speed. Your walking speed is 35 feet.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Unending Breath. You can hold your breath indef­
initely while you’re not incapacitated.
Lightning Resistance. You have resistance to
lightning damage.
Mingle with the Wind. You know the shocking
grasp cantrip. Starting at 3rd level, you can cast the
feather fall spell with this trait, without requiring a
material component. Starting at 5th level, you can
also cast the levitate spell with this trait, without re­
quiring a material component. Once you cast feather
fall or levitate with this trait, you can’t cast that spell
with it again until you finish a long rest. You can
also cast either of those spells using any spell slots
you have of the appropriate level.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for these spells when you cast them
with this trait (choose when you select this race).
SAZOP
OIDUALI

=== PAGE 17 ===
Earth Genasi Traits
Tracing their ancestry to dao, the genies of the El­
emental Plane of Earth, earth genasi inherit dao’s
steadfast strength and control over earth.
An earth genasi’s skin can be the colors of stone
and earth or a human skin tone with glittering
sparkles like gem dust. Some earth genasi have
lines marking their skin like cracks, either showing
glimmering gemlike veins or a dim, yellowish glow.
Earth genasi hair can appear carved of stone or
crystal or resemble strands of spun metal.
As an earth genasi, you have the following traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium or Small. You choose the
size when you select this race.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Earth Walk. You can move across difficult terrain
without expending extra movement if you are using
your walking speed on the ground or a floor.
Merge with Stone. You know the blade ward
cantrip. You can cast it as normal, and you can also
cast it as a bonus action a number of times equal to
your proficiency bonus, regaining all expended uses
when you finish a long rest.
Starting at 5th level, you can cast the pass without
trace spell with this trait, without requiring a mate­
rial component. Once you cast that spell with this
trait, you can’t do so again until you finish a long
rest. You can also cast it using any spell slots you
have of 2nd level or higher.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for these spells when you cast them
with this trait (choose when you select this race).
Fire Genasi Traits
Descended from efreet, the genies of the Elemental
Plane of Fire, fire genasi channel the flamboyant
and often destructive nature of flame. They show
their heritage in their skin tones, which can range
from deep charcoal to shades of red and orange.
Some bear skin tones common to humanity but with
fiery marks, such as slowly swirling lights under
their skin that resemble embers or glowing red lines
tracing over their bodies like cracks. Fire genasi
hair can resemble threads of fire or sooty smoke.
As a fire genasi, you have the following traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium or Small. You choose the
size when you select this race.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness
--col--
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Fire Resistance. You have resistance to
fire damage.
Reach to the Blaze. You know the produce flame
cantrip. Starting at 3rd level, you can cast the burn­
ing hands spell with this trait. Starting at 5th level,
you can also cast the flame blade spell with this
trait, without requiring a material component. Once
you cast burning hands or flame blade with this
trait, you can’t cast that spell with it again until you
finish a long rest. You can also cast either of those
spells using any spell slots you have of the appro­
priate level.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for these spells when you cast them
with this trait (choose when you select this race).
Water Genasi Traits
Water genasi descend from marids, aquatic genies
from the Elemental Plane of Water. Water genasi
are perfectly suited to life underwater and carry the
power of the waves inside themselves.
Their skin is often shades of blue or green, some­
times a blend of the two. If they have a human skin
tone, there is a glistening texture that catches the
light, like water droplets or nearly invisible fish
scales. Their hair can resemble seaweed, waving as
if in a current, or it can even be like water itself.
As a water genasi, you have the following traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium or Small. You choose the
size when you select this race.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet, and
you have a swimming speed equal to your
walking speed.
Acid Resistance. You have resistance to
acid damage.
Amphibious. You can breathe air and water.
Call to the Wave. You know the acid splash can­
trip. Starting at 3rd level, you can cast the create or
destroy water spell with this trait. Starting at 5th
level, you can also cast the water walk spell with
this trait, without requiring a material component.
Once you cast create or destroy water or water walk
with this trait, you can’t cast that spell with it again
until you finish a long rest. You can also cast either
of those spells using any spell slots you have of the
appropriate level.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for these spells when you cast them
with this trait (choose when you select this race).
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES

=== PAGE 18 ===
Once members of a people who escaped servitude
to mind flayers, githyanki split from their cousins,
githzerai, and fled to the Astral Plane. In that time­
less, silvery realm, githyanki honed their psionic
powers and built a great city called Tu’narath.
They have since spread throughout the multiverse,
starting in outposts outside the Astral Plane, called
creches, where time passes and their children can
reach adulthood.
A lanky people with skin tones of yellows, greens,
and browns, githyanki complement their physical
prowess with psionic might, instilled in them by
mind flayers and cultivated over eons in the Astral
Plane. Now all githyanki can use their psychic bond
with that plane to access splinters of knowledge left
behind by beings who travel, live, and die among the
silver astral clouds.
Githyanki who reside in the Astral Plane can live
indefinitely.
Githyanki Traits
As a githyanki, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
j8 CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
Astral Knowledge. You can mystically access a
reservoir of experiences of entities connected to the
Astral Plane. Whenever you finish a long rest, you
gain proficiency in one skill of your choice and with
one weapon or tool of your choice, selected from the
Player’s Handbook, as you momentarily project your
consciousness into the Astral Plane. These profi­
ciencies last until the end of your next long rest.
Githyanki Psionics. You know the mage hand
cantrip, and the hand is invisible when you cast the
cantrip with this trait.
Starting at 3rd level, you can cast the jump spell
with this trait. Starting at 5th level, you can also
cast the misty step spell with it. Once you cast jump
or misty step with this trait, you can’t cast that spell
with it again until you finish a long rest. You can
also cast either of those spells using any spell slots
you have of the appropriate level.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for these spells when you cast them
with this trait (choose when you select this race).
None of these spells require spell components when
you cast them with this trait.
Psychic Resilience. You have resistance to psy­
chic damage.

=== PAGE 19 ===
Githzerai
Githzerai migrated to the Everchanging Chaos
of Limbo after the ancient schism that split their
ancestors from their cousins, githyanki. Limbo is
a roiling maelstrom of matter and energy, collaps­
ing and reforming without purpose or direction,
until a creature exerts deliberate will to stabilize
it. Through their potent psionic power, githzerai
carved a home for themselves amid the chaos. As
the ages passed, githzerai explorers ranged out to
other planes and worlds of the multiverse.
Githzerai are generally slender, with speckled
skin in shades of yellow, green, or brown. Eons of
cultivating their mental powers within the endless
chaos of Limbo have imbued githzerai with the
ability to shape psionic energy to protect themselves
and probe minds.
Githzerai Traits
As a githzerai, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
--col--
Githzerai Psionics. You know the mage hand
cantrip, and the hand is invisible when you cast the
cantrip with this trait.
Starting at 3rd level, you can cast the shield spell
with this trait. Starting at 5th level, you can also
cast the detect thoughts spell with it. Once you cast
shield or detect thoughts with this trait, you can’t
cast that spell with it again until you finish a long
rest. You can also cast either of those spells using
any spell slots you have of the appropriate level.
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell­
casting ability for these spells when you cast them
with this trait (choose when you select this race).
None of these spells require spell components when
you cast them with this trait.
Mental Discipline. Your innate psychic defenses
grant you advantage on saving throws you make to
avoid or end the charmed and frightened conditions
on yourself.
Psychic Resilience. You have resistance to psy­
chic damage.

=== PAGE 20 ===
Goblin
A subterranean folk, goblins can be found in every
corner of the multiverse, often beside their bugbear
and hobgoblin kin. Long before the god Maglubiyet
conquered them, early goblins served in the court of
the Queen of Air and Darkness, one of the Feywild’s
archfey. Goblins thrived in her dangerous domain
thanks to a special boon from her—a supernatural
knack for finding the weak spots in foes larger than
themselves and for getting out of trouble. Goblins
brought this fey boon with them to worlds across
the Material Plane, even if they don’t remember the
fey realm they inhabited before Maglubiyet’s rise.
Now many goblins pursue their own destinies, es­
caping the plots of both archfey and gods.
Goblin Traits
As a goblin, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid. You are also
considered a goblinoid for any prerequisite or effect
that requires you to be a goblinoid.
--col--
Size. You are Small.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving
throws you make to avoid or end the charmed condi­
tion on yourself.
Fury of the Small. When you damage a creature
with an attack or a spell and the creature’s size is
larger than yours, you can cause the attack or spell
to deal extra damage to the creature. The extra
damage equals your proficiency bonus.
You can use this trait a number of times equal to
your proficiency bonus, regaining all expended uses
when you finish a long rest, and you can use it no
more than once per turn.
Nimble Escape. You can take the Disengage or
Hide action as a bonus action on each of your turns.

=== PAGE 21 ===
Goliath
The first goliaths lived on the highest mountain
peaks—far above the tree line, where the air is thin
and frigid winds howl. Distantly related to giants
and infused with the supernatural essence of their
ancestors’ mountainous home, goliaths stand be­
tween 7 and 8 feet tall and have a wide array of skin
tones resembling different types of stone.
Goliath Traits
As a goliath, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Little Giant. You have proficiency in the Athletics
skill, and you count as one size larger when deter­
mining your carrying capacity and the weight you
can push, drag, or lift.
--col--
Mountain Born. You have resistance to cold dam­
age. You also naturally acclimate to high altitudes,
even if you’ve never been to one. This includes eleva­
tions above 20,000 feet.
Stone’s Endurance. You can supernaturally draw
on unyielding stone to shrug off harm. When you
take damage, you can use your reaction to roll a
dl2. Add your Constitution modifier to the number
rolled and reduce the damage by that total.
You can use this trait a number of times equal to
your proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended
uses when you finish a long rest.
2i

=== PAGE 22 ===
Harengon
Harengons originated in the Feywild, where they
spoke Sylvan and embodied the spirit of freedom
and travel. In time, these rabbitfolk hopped into
other worlds, bringing the fey realm’s exuberance
with them and learning new languages as they went.
Harengons are bipedal, with the characteristic
long feet of the rabbits they resemble and fur in a
variety of colors. They share the keen senses and
powerful legs of leporine creatures and are full
of energy, like a wound-up spring. Harengons are
blessed with a little fey luck, and they often find
themselves a few fortunate feet away from dangers
during adventures.
22 CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
Harengon Traits
As a harengon, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium or Small. You choose the
size when you select this race.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Hare-Trigger. You can add your proficiency bonus
to your initiative rolls.
Leporine Senses. You have proficiency in the Per­
ception skill.
Lucky Footwork. When you fail a Dexterity sav­
ing throw, you can use your reaction to roll a d4 and
add it to the save, potentially turning the failure into
a success. You can’t use this reaction if you’re prone
or your speed is 0.
Rabbit Hop. As a bonus action, you can jump a
number of feet equal to five times your proficiency
bonus, without provoking opportunity attacks. You
can use this trait only if your speed is greater than
0. You can use it a number of times equal to your
proficiency bonus, and you regain all expended uses
when you finish a long rest.

=== PAGE 23 ===
Hobgoblin
Hobgoblins trace their origins to the ancient courts
of the Feywild, where they first appeared with their
goblin and bugbear kin. Many of them were driven
from the Feywild by the conquering god Maglubiyet,
who marshaled them as soldiers, but the fey realm
left its mark; wherever they are in the multiverse,
they continue to channel an aspect of the Feywild’s
rule of reciprocity, which creates a mystical bond
between the giver and the receiver of a gift.
On some worlds, such bonds lead hobgoblins to
form communities with deep ties to one another. In
Eberron and the Forgotten Realms, vast hobgoblin
legions have emerged, with ranks of devoted sol­
diers famed for their unity.
Hobgoblins are generally taller than their goblin
cousins but not quite as big as bugbears. They have
curved, pointed ears and noses that turn bright red
• or blue during displays of emotion.
Hobgoblin Traits
As a hobgoblin, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid. You are also
considered a goblinoid for any prerequisite or effect
that requires you to be a goblinoid.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving
throws you make to avoid or end the charmed condi­
tion on yourself.
Fey Gift. You can use this trait to take the Help ac­
tion as a bonus action, and you can do so a number
of times equal to your proficiency bonus. You regain
all expended uses when you finish a long rest.
Starting at 3rd level, choose one of the options
below each time you take the Help action with
this trait:
Hospitality. You and the creature you help each
gain a number of temporary hit points equal to
ld6 plus your proficiency bonus.
Passage. You and the creature you help each in­
crease your walking speeds by 10 feet until the
start of your next turn.
Spite. Until the start of your next turn, the first time
the creature you help hits a target with an attack
roll, that target has disadvantage on the next at­
tack roll it makes within the next minute.
--col--
Fortune from the Many. If you miss with an at­
tack roll or fail an ability check or a saving throw,
you can draw on your bonds of reciprocity to gain a
bonus to the roll equal to the number of allies you
can see within 30 feet of you (maximum bonus of
+3). You can use this trait a number of times equal
to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all ex­
pended uses when you finish a long rest.
CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES 23

=== PAGE 24 ===
Kenku
Feathered folk who resemble ravens, kenku are
blessed with keen observation and supernaturally
