e Unless surprised, a creature can avert its eyes to avoid the
saving throw at the start of its turn. If the creature does so,
it has disadvantage on attack rolls against the bodak until
the start of its next turn. If the creature looks at the bodak
in the meantime, that creature must immediately make the
d saving throw.
s
Sunlight Hypersensitivity. The bodak takes 5 radiant damage
n
when it starts its turn in sunlight. While in sunlight, it has dis­
r­ advantage on attack rolls and ability checks.
Unusual Nature. The bodak doesn’t require air, food,
e
drink, or sleep.
or Actions
o­ Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: 4-5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
4 (1 d4 4- 2) bludgeoning damage plus 9 (2d8) necrotic damage.
e. Withering Gaze. One creature that the bodak can see within 60
feet of it must make a DC 13 Constitution saving throw, taking
y­ 22 (4dl0) necrotic damage on a failed save, or half as much
s damage on a successful one.
Bonus Actions
m
Aura of Annihilation. The bodak activates or deactivates this
deathly aura. While active, the aura deals 5 necrotic damage to
any creature that ends its turn within 30 feet of the bodak. Un­
dead and Fiends ignore this effect.

=== PAGE 65 ===
Boggle
Small Fey, Typically Chaotic Neutral
Armor Class 14
Hit Points 18 (4d6 + 4)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
8 (-1) 18 (+4) 13 (+1) 6 (-2) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Skills Perception +5, Sleight of Hand +6, Stealth +6
Damage Resistances fire
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Sylvan
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions
Pummel. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 2 (1 d6 - 1) bludgeoning damage.
Oil Puddle. The boggle creates a puddle of nonflammable
oil. The puddle is 1 inch deep and covers the ground in the
boggle’s space. The puddle is difficult terrain for all creatures
except boggles and lasts for 1 hour. The oil has one of the fol­
lowing additional effects of the boggle’s choice:
Slippery Oil. Any non-boggle creature that enters the puddle or
starts its turn there must succeed on a DC 11 Dexterity sav­
ing throw or fall prone.
Sticky Oil. Any non-boggle creature that enters the puddle or
starts its turn there must succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving
throw or be restrained. On its turn, a creature can use an
action to try to extricate itself, ending the effect and moving
into the nearest unoccupied space of its choice with a suc­
cessful DC 11 Strength check.
Bonus Actions
Boggle Oil. The boggle excretes nonflammable oil from its
pores, giving itself one of the following benefits of its choice
until it uses this bonus action again:
Slippery Oil. The boggle has advantage on Dexterity (Acrobat­
ics) checks made to escape bonds and end grapples, and it
can move through openings large enough for a Tiny creature
without squeezing.
Sticky Oil. The boggle has advantage on Strength (Athletics)
checks made to grapple and any ability check made to main­
tain a hold on another creature, a surface, or an object. The
boggle can also climb difficult surfaces, including upside
down on ceilings, without needing to make an ability check.
Dimensional Rift. The boggle creates an invisible and immobile
rift within an opening or frame it can see within 5 feet of it, pro­
vided that the space is no bigger than 10 feet on any side. The
dimensional rift bridges the distance between that space and
a point within 30 feet of it that the boggle can see or specify by
distance and direction (such as “30 feet straight up”). While
next to the rift, the boggle can see through it and is considered
to be next to the destination as well, and anything the boggle
puts through the rift (including a portion of its body) emerges
at the destination. Only the boggle can use the rift, and it lasts
until the end of the boggle’s next turn.
--col--
Boggle
Boggles are the little bogeys of fairy tales. They lurk
in the fringes of the Feywild and are also found on
the Material Plane, where they hide under beds and
in closets, waiting to frighten and bedevil folk with
their mischief.
Boggles are born out of feelings of loneliness.
They materialize when a sapient being feels iso­
lated or abandoned near a place where the Feywild
touches the world. For example, a forsaken child
might unintentionally conjure a boggle and see
them as a sort of imaginary friend. A boggle might
also appear in the attic of a lonely widower’s house
or in a hermit’s cave.
Boggles engage in petty pranks to amuse them­
selves, using the oil they excrete to cause trouble.
A boggle also isn’t above breaking dishes, hiding
tools, startling cows to decrease their milk, or hid­
ing a baby in an attic. Although a boggle’s antics
might cause distress and unintentional harm, mis­
chief—not mayhem—is usually the intent. If threat­
ened, a boggle flees rather than stand and fight.
A boggle can create magical openings to travel
short distances or to pilfer items that would other­
wise be beyond its reach. To create such a rift in
space, a boggle must be adjacent to a space defined
by a frame, such as an open window or a doorway,
a gap between the bars of a cage, or the opening
between the feet of a bed and the floor. The rift is
invisible and disappears after a few seconds—just
enough time for the boggle to step, reach, or attack
through it.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 65

=== PAGE 66 ===
Boneclaw
A wizard who tries to become a lich but fails might
become a boneclaw instead. These hideous, cack­
ling monsters share a few of liches’ attributes, but
while liches are immortal masters of the arcane,
boneclaws are thralls to evil, hatred, and pain.
The most important part of the transformation
ritual occurs when the soul of the aspiring lich
migrates to a prepared phylactery. If the wizard
is too physically or magically weak to compel the
soul into its new home, the soul instead seeks out
a master—a person within a few miles who has a
hate-filled heart. The soul bonds to that person and
becomes enslaved to its new master’s wishes. The
boneclaw forms near its master, sometimes appear­
ing before that individual to receive orders and other
times simply seeking to fulfill its master’s desires.
A boneclaw can serve only an evil creature. If its
master finds redemption or sincerely turns away
from the path of evil, the boneclaw is destroyed.
Otherwise, a boneclaw can’t be destroyed while its
master lives. No matter what happens to the bone­
claw’s body, it re-forms within hours.
In service to its master, a boneclaw delights in
causing horrific pain. It lurks like a spider in shad­
owy recesses, waiting for victims to approach within
reach of its long, bony limbs. Once speared, a crea­
ture is pulled into the darkness to be sliced apart.
Boneclaw
Large Undead, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 150 (20dl0 + 40)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 13 (+1) 15 (+2) 9 (-1)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +6, Wis +6
Skills Perception +6, Stealth +7
Damage Resistances cold, necrotic
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages Common plus one language spoken by its master
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Rejuvenation. While its master lives, a destroyed boneclaw
gains a new body in IdlO hours, with all its hit points. The new
body appears within 1 mile of the boneclaw’s master.
Unusual Nature. The boneclaw doesn't require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
66 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Actions
Multiattack. The boneclaw makes two Piercing Claw attacks.
Piercing Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
target. Hit: 20 (3dl0 + 4) piercing damage plus 11 (2dl0) ne­
crotic damage. If the target is a creature, the boneclaw can pull
the target up to 10 feet toward itself, and the target is grappled
(escape DC 14). The boneclaw has two claws. While a claw
grapples a target, the claw can attack only that target.
Shadow Jump (Recharge 5-6). If the boneclaw is in dim light
or darkness, each creature of the boneclaw’s choice within 15
feet of it must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw or
take 34 (5dl2 + 2) necrotic damage.
The boneclaw then teleports up to 60 feet to an unoccupied
space it can see. It can bring one creature it’s grappling, tele­
porting that creature to an unoccupied space it can see within
5 feet of its destination. The destination spaces of this telepor­
tation must be in dim light or darkness.
Bonus Actions
Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the boneclaw
takes the Hide action.
Reactions
Deadly Reach. In response to a creature entering a space within
15 feet of it, the boneclaw makes one Piercing Claw attack
against that creature.

=== PAGE 67 ===
Bulezau
Diseased manifestations of animalistic rage,
bulezaus embody the violence of nature. Across the
Abyss, these demons lurk in deep canyons and lofty
crags, and many find a place in the ranks of demon
lords’ armies, serving as foot soldiers in the Abyss’s
endless warring.
Bulezaus crave violence. Their eagerness to kill
and willingness to die make them common mem­
bers of many demon lords’ entourages. When not
being corralled by larger and tougher demons,
bulezaus gather into scrabbling mobs, wrestling
and fighting among themselves until a better target
comes along or until a stronger demon bullies them
into subservience.
Disfiguring ailments plague bulezaus: crusted
eyes, maggots wriggling in open sores, and a reek of
rotten meat that follows them wherever they go.
Bulezau
Medium Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 52 (7d8 + 21)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 14 (+2) 17 (+3) 8(-l) 9(-l) 6 (-2)
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Rotting Presence. When any creature that isn’t a demon starts
its turn within 30 feet of the bulezau, that creature must suc­
ceed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or take 3 (1 d6)
necrotic damage.
Standing Leap. The bulezau’s long jump is up to 20 feet and its
high jump is up to 10 feet, with or without a running start.
Sure-Footed. The bulezau has advantage on Strength and
Dexterity saving throws made against effects that would
knock it prone.
Actions________________________________
Barbed Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 8 (1 dl2 + 2) piercing damage plus 4 (ld8) necrotic
damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 13
Constitution saving throw against disease or become poisoned
until the disease ends. While poisoned in this way, the target
sports festering boils, coughs up flies, and sheds rotting skin,
and the target must repeat the saving throw after every 24
hours that elapse. On a successful save, the disease ends. On
a failed save, the target’s hit point maximum is reduced by 4
(1 d8). The target dies if its hit point maximum is reduced to 0.
--col--
Some ask why the bulezau, for all its ra<je and violence,
has the head of a ^oat. I always respond, have you met
a <joat? They're stubborn, they're vicious, and they
rarely <jo down without bashing you several times in
that's awfully Specific. I Say, tAovx't pry.
the shinS-
TASHA
you
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY

=== PAGE 68 ===
Cadaver Collector
The ancient war machines known as cadaver collec
tors lumber aimlessly across the blasted plains of
Acheron until they are called upon by a necroman­
cer to bolster the ranks of a conquering army on the
Material Plane. These fearsome Constructs obey
their summoners until they are dismissed back to
Acheron, but if a summoner comes to a bad end, a
cadaver collector might wander the Material Plane
for centuries, collecting corpses while searching for
a way to return home.
Cadaver collectors respond to a summons from a
mortal only when they are called to the scene of a
great battle—either where one is in progress, where
one is imminent, or where one once took place.
They encase themselves in the armor and weapons
of fallen warriors and impale the corpses of those
warriors on the lances and other weapons embed­
ded in their salvaged armor.
Corpses that accumulate on a cadaver collector’s
shell aren’t just grisly battle trophies. A cadaver col­
lector can summon the spirits of these cadavers to
battle against its enemies. Although these specters
are individually weak, a cadaver col­
lector can call up an almost endless
supply of them, if given enough time.
Cadaver Collector
Large Construct, Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 189 (18dl0 + 90)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
21 (+5) 14 (+2) 20 (+5) 5 (-3) 11 (+0) 8 (-1)
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison, psychic; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks that aren’t
adamantine
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands all languages but can’t speak
Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Magic Resistance. The collector has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Unusual Nature. The collector doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
68 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
c­
e
r
e
­
Actions
Multiattack. The collector makes two Slam attacks.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 18 (3d8 + 5) bludgeoning damage plus 16 (3dl0) ne­
crotic damage.
Paralyzing Breath (Recharge 5-6). The collector releases par­
alyzing gas in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must
make a successful DC 18 Constitution saving throw or be par­
alyzed for 1 minute. A paralyzed creature repeats the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself
with a success.
Bonus Actions
Summon Specters (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The
collector calls up the enslaved spirits of those it has slain; 1 d4
specters (without Sunlight Sensitivity; see the Monster Manual)
arise in unoccupied spaces within 15 feet of it. The specters act
right after the collector on the same initiative count and fight
until they're destroyed. They disappear when the collector is
destroyed.

=== PAGE 69 ===
Canoloth
A type of yugoloth, canoloths are fiendish trackers
and guardians employed by evil powers. They prefer
to enter into contracts to guard valuable treasures
and important locations. They always do exactly as
asked—never any more, never any less.
With senses sharp enough to pinpoint the loca­
tions of nearby invisible creatures, canoloths re­
spond unfailingly to any threat to their charges. Fur­
thermore, they emit a magical distortion field that
prevents creatures close to them from teleporting.
Canoloths confront intruders with swift and ter­
rible force, projecting long, spiny tongues to grab
their foes and drag them close. What happens next
depends on the contract. Unless instructed to kill, a
canoloth merely holds on to its prisoner, but if given
the order to do so, it tears its prey limb from limb.
Canoloth
Medium Fiend (Yugoloth), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 120 (16d8 + 48)
Speed 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 10 (+0) 17 (+3) 5 (-3) 17 (+3) 12 (+1)
Skills Investigation +3, Perception +9
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities acid, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 19
Languages Abyssal, Infernal, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Dimensional Lock. Other creatures can’t teleport to or from
a space within 60 feet of the canoloth. Any attempt to do so
is wasted.
--col--
Magic Resistance. The canoloth has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Uncanny Senses. The canoloth can’t be surprised unless it’s
incapacitated.
Actions
Multiattack. The canoloth makes one Bite or Tongue attack
and one Claw attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (1 d6 + 4) piercing damage plus 18 (4d8) force damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (1 d6 + 4) slashing damage plus 9 (2d8) force damage.
Tongue. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 30 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (1 dl2 + 4) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) acid
damage. If the target is Medium or smaller, it is grappled (es­
cape DC 15), pulled up to 30 feet toward the canoloth, and re­
strained until the grapple ends. The canoloth can grapple one
target at a time with its tongue.
.......=
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 69

=== PAGE 70 ===
Catoblepas
The catoblepas is as loathsome as the vile swamp­
lands in which it lives, a conglomeration of bloated
buffalo, dinosaur, warthog, and hippopotamus
parts. Despite its ungainly physiology, a catoblepas
resembles a natural animal in its behavior, ambling
through its marshy home, munching choice vegeta­
tion, eating the occasional bit of carrion, and wal­
lowing in mire. A catoblepas might be found with
the one mate it chooses for life and, on occasion,
with a calf. A catoblepas attacks anyone that moves
too close, especially if guarding its young.
A catoblepas’s stink, like the stench of death
mixed with swamp gas and skunk musk, gives it
away as being much more ghastly than its appear­
ance suggests. When it is on the attack, a catoblepas
reveals the extent of its horrific nature. The crea­
ture’s serpentine neck has trouble lifting its head,
but one glare from its bloodshot eyes can rot flesh.
At the end of its tail is a club that can rattle body and
soul if it strikes true, leaving a victim unable to act
while the catoblepas feasts on its body.
Blighted Territory
A catoblepas’s nature as a creature of disease and
decay brings out similar characteristics in the crea­
ture’s swampy habitat. Such a wetland becomes
gloomy, tangled, and more fetid than it was before.
Beneficial qualities of the environment, such as
healing herbs and clean water, become degraded,
and swamp gases take on a hint of the catoblepas’s
foulness. Animals in the area are more aggressive
and liable to be diseased. Degenerate creatures are
likely to take up residence near a catoblepas’s terri­
tory, as are those seeking to avoid notice.
Catoblepases in Folklore
Ordinary folk rarely see a catoblepas, but the crea­
ture has such a feared reputation that stories about
it are ingrained in the popular culture. Any rumor of
70 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
a catoblepas taking up residence nearby is taken to
be a bad omen, even if the rumor is proven false. In
some lands, the silhouette of a catoblepas, with its
tail extended over its body and its head held low, is a
baleful heraldic figure signifying death or doom.
Sages say that gods of pestilence and rot created
catoblepases as embodiments of their influence,
while other stories link them to misfortune. Some
such tales claim that swamp-dwelling hags tend
catoblepases like cattle, drinking the monsters’
milk and using them as guardians or pets. Other
legends say that those of impure heart can tame a
catoblepas and whisper of malevolent warlocks and
wicked knights who ride them into battle.
Catoblepas
Large Monstrosity, Unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 84 (8dl0 + 40)
s Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 12 (+1) 21 (+5) 3 H) 14 (+2) 8(-l)
d Skills Perception +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages —
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Stench. Any creature other than a catoblepas that starts its
turn within 10 feet of the catoblepas must succeed on a DC 16
Constitution saving throw or be poisoned until the start of the
creature’s next turn. On a successful saving throw, the creature
is immune to the Stench of any catoblepas for 1 hour.
Actions
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 21 (5d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage, and the target must
succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or be stunned
until the start of the catoblepas’s next turn.
Death Ray (Recharge 5-6). The catoblepas targets one creature
it can see within 30 feet of it. The target must make a DC 16
Constitution saving throw, taking 36 (8d8) necrotic damage
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the target instead takes
64 necrotic damage. The target dies if reduced to 0 hit points
f by this ray.
- ■ ...— - -—1 " " -- - •

=== PAGE 71 ===
Cattle
Many kinds of cattle roam the multiverse, some of
them domesticated and others feral. In many cul­
tures, cattle are almost like family to the folk who
tend to them.
Aurochs
An aurochs is a large, fierce bovine with jutting
horns. In many lands, herds of aurochs roam free,
while elsewhere orcs and humans train them from
an early age to carry riders into combat.
h. -..-r. L... .. ... ... -----------1
Aurochs
Large Beast (Cattle), Unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 38 (4dl0 + 16)
Speed 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
20 (+5) 10 (+0) 19 (+4) 2 (-4) 12 (+1) 5 (-3)
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions
Core. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) piercing damage. If the aurochs moved at
least 20 feet straight toward the target immediately before the
hit, the target takes an extra 9 (2d8) piercing damage, and the
target must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone if it is a creature.
