jon Visit. A creature can leave the demiplane only by using
magic that enables planar travel, such as the plane shift spell.
The demiplane resembles a stone cave roughly 1,000 feet in
diameter with a ceiling 100 feet high. Like a stomach, it con­
tains the remains of past meals. The dreadnought can’t be
harmed from within the demiplane. If the dreadnought dies,
the demiplane disappears, and everything inside it appears
around the dreadnought’s corpse. The demiplane is otherwise
indestructible.
--col--
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dreadnought fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Sever Silver Cord. If the dreadnought scores a critical hit
against a creature traveling by means of the astral projection
spell, the dreadnought can cut the target’s silver cord instead
of dealing damage.
Unusual Nature. The dreadnought doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The dreadnought makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 36 (5dl 0 + 9) force damage. If the target is a Huge or
smaller creature and this damage reduces it to 0 hit points or it
is incapacitated, the dreadnought swallows it. The swallowed
target, along with everything it is wearing and carrying, appears
in an unoccupied space on the floor of the Demiplanar Donjon.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target.
Hit: 19 (3d6 + 9) force damage.
Legendary Actions
The dreadnought can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
the options below. Only one legendary option can be used at a
time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The dread­
nought regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Claw. The dreadnought makes one Claw attack.
Donjon Visit (Costs 2 Actions). One Huge or smaller creature
that the dreadnought can see within 60 feet of it must suc­
ceed on a DC 19 Charisma saving throw or be teleported to
an unoccupied space on the floor of the Demiplanar Don­
jon. At the end of the target’s next turn, it reappears in the
space it left or in the nearest unoccupied space if that space
is occupied.
Psychic Projection (Costs 3 Actions). Each creature within 60
feet of the dreadnought must make a DC 19 Wisdom saving
throw, taking 26 (4dl0 + 4) psychic damage on a failed save,
or half as much damage on a successful one.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 51

=== PAGE 52 ===
B
abau
Demons and devils clash endlessly for control of
the Lower Planes. One of these battles pitted the le­
gions of the archdevil Glasya against the screaming
hordes of the demon lord Graz’zt (appears in this
book). It is said that when Glasya wounded Graz’zt
with her sword, the first babaus arose where his
blood struck the ground. Their sudden appearance
helped rout Glasya and secured Graz’zt’s place as
one of the preeminent demon lords of the Abyss.
A babau demon has the cunning of a devil and the
bloodthirstiness of a demon. It has leathery skin
pulled tight over its gaunt frame and a curved horn
protruding from the back of its elongated skull. A
babau’s baleful glare can weaken a creature, and its
talons gleam with acidic slime.
52 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Babau
Medium Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 82 (lld8 + 33)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 16 (+3) 16 (+3) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 13 (+1)
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +5
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Abyssal
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions
Multiattack. The babau makes two Claw attacks. It can replace
one attack with a use of Spellcasting or Weakening Gaze.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (1 d4 + 4) slashing damage plus 2 (1 d4) acid damage.
Spellcasting. The babau casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Wisdom as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 11):
At will: darkness, dispel magic, fear, heat metal, levitate
Weakening Gaze. The babau targets one creature that it can
see within 20 feet of it. The target must make a DC 13 Consti­
tution saving throw. On a failed save, the target deals only half
damage with weapon attacks that use Strength for 1 minute.
The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.

=== PAGE 53 ===
Bael
With the Blood War between devils and demons
raging for eons and no end in sight, opportunities
abound for ambitious archdevils to win fame, glory,
and power in the ongoing struggle. Duke Bael, one
of Mammon’s most important vassals, has won
fame and acclaim for his victories. Charged with
leading sixty-six companies of barbed devils (see the
Monster Manual), Bael has proven to be a tactical
genius, earning esteem for himself and his master
as a result of victory after victory over the abyssal
host. Mammon relies on Bael to safeguard his hold­
ings because of Bael’s battle acumen. During a time
when so many other archdevils have lost their posi­
tions, Mammon has never been ousted, which is a
testament to Bael’s skill on the battlefield.
For his accomplishments, Bael has been granted
the title of Bronze General. His accolades notwith­
standing, he has had a difficult time navigating the
quagmire of infernal politics. His critics call him
naive, though never to his face. His primary interest
has always been leading soldiers in battle, so he
finds it frustrating to have his ambitions of ascend­
ing to a higher rank constantly stymied by politically
shrewd rivals.
--col--
Bael prefers to make servants out of his adver­
saries, and mortals bound to his service earn their
wretched place by falling victim to his superior strat­
agems. Bael gladly spares the lives of those he de­
feats—if they pledge their souls and service to him.
Demons are an exception; although he is willing to
corrupt almost any other foes, he always destroys
demons he defeats.
Bael also welcomes mortals into his service if they
can provide him with an advantage in his politick­
ing. He recruits savvy individuals and relies on them
to represent his interests at Mammon’s court, which
leaves him free to pursue his battle lust.
Despite his lack of interest in affairs outside
battle, or perhaps because of it, Bael has gained a
small following of cultists. Those who worship at
his altar call him the King of Hell, and the most
deluded believe that he is the lord of all devils. In
arcane circles, certain writings, such as the dreaded
Book of Fire, say that Bael revealed the invisibility
spell to the world, though some scholars of magic
hotly refute such claims. Bael is sometimes depicted
as a toad, a cat, a human, or some combination of
these forms.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 53

=== PAGE 54 ===
Bael
Large Fiend (Devil), Lawful Evil
Armor Class 18 (plate)
Hit Points 189 (18dl0 + 90)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
24 (+7) 17 (+3) 20 (+5) 21 (+5) 24 (+7) 24 (+7)
Saving Throws Dex +9, Con +11, Int +11, Cha +13
Skills Intimidation +13, Perception +13, Persuasion +13
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 23
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 19 (22,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +6
Dread. Any creature, other than a devil, that starts its turn
within 10 feet of Bael must succeed on a DC 22 Wisdom saving
throw or be frightened of him until the start of its next turn. A
creature succeeds on this saving throw automatically if Bael
wishes it or if he is incapacitated.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Bael fails a saving throw, he
can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Bael have advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Regeneration. Bael regains 20 hit points at the start of his turn.
If he takes cold or radiant damage, this trait doesn’t function at
the start of his next turn. Bael dies only if he starts his turn with
0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate.
Actions
Multiattack. Bael makes two Hellish Morningstar attacks.
Hellish Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach
20 ft., one target. Hit: 16 (2d8 + 7) force damage plus 9 (2d8)
necrotic damage.
Infernal Command. Each of Bael’s allies within 60 feet of him
can’t be charmed or frightened until the end of his next turn.
Spellcasting. Bael casts one of the following spells, requiring no
material components and using Charisma as the spellcasting
ability (spell save DC 21):
At will: alter self (can become Medium), charm person, detect
magic, invisibility, major image
3/day each: dispel magic, fly, suggestion, wall off re
1/day: dominate monster
Teleport. Bael teleports, along with any equipment he is wearing
or carrying, up to 120 feet to an unoccupied space he can see.
Legendary Actions
Bael can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the options
below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a time
and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Bael regains
spent legendary actions at the start of his turn.
Fiendish Magic. Bael uses Spellcasting or Teleport.
Infernal Command. Bael uses Infernal Command.
Attack (Costs 2 Actions). Bael makes one Hellish Morning­
star attack.
54 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
B
alhannoth
Native to the Shadowfell, the vicious, predatory
balhannoth alters reality in its lair to make the
place appear inviting to travelers. A limited form of
telepathy enables a balhannoth to identify images
of places where its prey expects their needs and de­
sires to be met, such as an inn or a temple offering
healing. It then warps reality around itself, hiding it­
self and remaking its environment to resemble such
a place. The imitation is imperfect, but it’s good
enough to fool greedy or desperate creatures. Once
its prey enters the trap, it snatches the targets and
teleports away to feed on their fear and despair.
Dungeon builders and Underdark tyrants some­
times venture into the Shadowfell to capture bal-
hannoths for use as guardians.
A Balhannoth’s Lair
In the Shadowfell, balhannoths make their lairs
near places inhabited by creatures they hunt. They
typically haunt well-traveled roads and paths,
snatching people who come along. A balhannoth
used as a guardian in the Underdark might lair in
caves near Underdark passages and guard the ways
in and out of its keepers’ enclave.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), a bal­
hannoth can take one of the following lair actions;
the balhannoth can’t take the same lair action two
rounds in a row:
Teleport. The balhannoth targets one creature
within 500 feet of it. The target must succeed on a
DC 16 Wisdom saving throw, or the target, along
with whatever it is wearing and carrying, teleports
to an unoccupied space of the balhannoth’s choice
within 60 feet of it.
Vanish. The balhannoth targets one creature within
500 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 16
Wisdom saving throw, or the balhannoth becomes
invisible to that creature for 1 minute. This effect
ends if the balhannoth attacks the target.
Warp Terrain. The balhannoth warps reality
around it in an area up to 500 feet square. After
10 minutes, the terrain in the area reshapes to
assume the appearance of a location sought by
one Humanoid whose desires the balhannoth has
sensed (see Regional Effects below). The transfor­
mation affects nonliving material only and can’t
create anything with moving parts or magical
properties. Any object created in this area is, upon

=== PAGE 55 ===
close inspection, revealed as a fake. Books are
filled with empty pages, golden items are obvious
counterfeits, and so on. The transformation lasts
until the balhannoth dies or takes this lair ac­
tion again.
Regional Effects
A region containing a balhannoth’s lair becomes
warped by the creature’s unnatural presence, which
creates one or more of the following effects:
Sense Desires. The balhannoth can sense the
strongest desires of any Humanoid within 1 mile
of it and learns whether those desires involve a
place: a safe location to rest, such as a temple, a
home, or somewhere else.
Supernatural Lure. Creatures within 1 mile of the
balhannoth’s lair experience the sensation of be­
ing close to whatever they desire most. The sensa­
tion grows stronger the closer the creatures come
to the balhannoth’s lair.
If the balhannoth dies, these effects end
immediately.
--col--
Balhannoth
Large Aberration, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 114 (12dl0 + 48)
Speed 25 ft., climb 25 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 8(-l) 18 (+4) 6 (-2) 15 (+2) 8 (-1)
Saving Throws Con +8
Skills Perception +6
Condition Immunities blinded
Senses blindsight 500 ft. (blind beyond this radius),
passive Perception 16
Languages understands Deep Speech, telepathy 1 mile
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) Proficiency Bonus+4
Legendary Resistance (2/Day). If the balhannoth fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The balhannoth makes one Bite attack and two
Tentacle attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
19 (3dl0 + 3) piercing damage.
Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 15) and is moved up to 5 feet toward the
balhannoth. Until this grapple ends, the target is restrained,
and the balhannoth can’t use this tentacle against other tar­
gets. The balhannoth has four tentacles.
Legendary Actions
The balhannoth can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from
the options below. Only one legendary action can be used at a
time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The balhan­
noth regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Bite. The balhannoth makes one Bite attack against one crea­
ture it has grappled.
Teleport. The balhannoth teleports, along with any equipment
it is wearing or carrying and any creatures it has grappled, up
to 60 feet to an unoccupied space it can see.
Vanish. The balhannoth magically becomes invisible for up to
10 minutes or until immediately after it makes an attack roll.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 55

=== PAGE 56 ===
Banderhobb
A banderhobb is a hybrid of shadow and flesh.
Through vile magic, these components take on an
enormous and horrific upright shape resembling a
bipedal toad. In this form, a banderhobb temporarily
serves its creator as a thug, a thief, and a kidnapper
that swallows the unwary.
Hags have devised a ritual for creating bander-
hobbs—a hag who knows the ritual might be willing
to teach it for the right price. Some other wicked
Fey and powerful Fiends also know of the process,
as do a few mortal mages.
During its brief existence, a banderhobb attempts
to carry out its creator’s bidding. It accomplishes
its mission with no concern for the harm it suffers
or causes. Its only desire is to serve and succeed. A
banderhobb that is assigned to track down a target
is particularly dangerous when it is provided with a
lock of hair, a personal belonging, or another object
connected to the target. Possession of such an item
allows it to sense the creature’s location from as far
as a mile away.
A banderhobb fulfills its duties until its existence
ends. When it expires, usually several days after
its birth, it leaves behind only tarry goo and wisps
of shadow. Legends tell of an ominous tower in the
Shadowfell where the shadows sometimes reform
and banderhobbs roam.
=======
Banderhobb
Large Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 84 (8dl0 + 40)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
20 (+5) 12 (+1) 20 (+5) 11 (+0) 14 (+2) 8 (-1)
Skills Athletics +8, Stealth +7
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages understands Common and the languages of its
creator but can’t speak
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Resonant Connection. If the banderhobb has even a tiny piece
of a creature or an object in its possession, such as a lock of
hair or a splinter of wood, it knows the most direct route to that
creature or object if it is within 1 mile of the banderhobb.
Actions
Multiattack. The banderhobb makes one Bite attack and
one Tongue attack. It can replace one attack with a use of
Shadow Step.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (3d6 + 5) piercing damage, and the target is grappled
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
==================================
(escape DC 16) if it is a Large or smaller creature. Until this
grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the banderhobb
can’t use its Bite attack or Tongue attack on another target.
Tongue. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 15 ft., one crea­
ture. Hit: 10 (3d6) necrotic damage, and the target must make
a DC 16 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the target is
pulled to a space within 5 feet of the banderhobb.
Shadow Step. The banderhobb teleports up to 30 feet to an un
occupied space of dim light or darkness that it can see.
Swallow. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one Me­
dium or smaller creature grappled by the banderhobb. Hit: 15
(3d6 + 5) piercing damage. The creature is also swallowed,
and the grapple ends. The swallowed creature is blinded and
restrained, it has total cover against attacks and other effects
outside the banderhobb, and it takes 10 (3d6) necrotic dam­
age at the start of each of the banderhobb's turns. A creature
reduced to 0 hit points in this way stops taking the necrotic
damage and becomes stable.
The banderhobb can have only one creature swallowed at a
time. While the banderhobb isn’t incapacitated, it can regur­
gitate the creature at any time (no action required) in a space
within 5 feet of it. The creature exits prone. If the banderhobb
dies, it likewise regurgitates a swallowed creature.
Bonus Actions
Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the bander­
hobb takes the Hide action.

=== PAGE 57 ===
Baphomet
Civilization is weakness and brutality is strength
in the credo of Baphomet, the Horned King and the
Prince of Beasts. He is worshiped by those who
want to break the confines of civility and unleash
their bestial natures, for Baphomet envisions a
world without restraint, where creatures live out
their most bloodthirsty desires.
Cults devoted to Baphomet use mazes and com­
plex knots as their emblems. They create secret
places to indulge themselves, including labyrinths
of the sort their master favors. Bloodstained crowns
and weapons of iron and brass decorate their pro­
fane altars.
Over time, a cultist of Baphomet becomes tainted
by his influence, gaining bloodshot eyes and coarse,
thickening hair. Small horns eventually sprout from
the cultist’s forehead. In time, a devoted cultist
might transform entirely into a minotaur, which is
considered the greatest gift of the Prince of Beasts.
Baphomet appears as a fearsome, 20-foot-tall mi­
notaur with six iron horns. A fiendish light burns in
his red eyes. Although he is filled with bestial blood
lust, there lies within him a cruel and cunning intel­
lect devoted to subverting all civilization.
Baphomet wields a great glaive called Heart­
cleaver. He also charges his enemies and gores
them with his horns, trampling his foes into the
earth and rending them with his teeth like a beast.
Baphomejt’s Lair
Baphomet’s lair is his palace, the Lyktion, which is
on the layer of the Abyss called the Endless Maze.
Nestled within the twisting passages of the plane­
wide labyrinth, the Lyktion is immaculately main­
tained and surrounded by a moat constructed in the
fashion of a three-dimensional maze. The palace is
a towering structure whose interior is as labyrin­
thine as the plane on which it stands; it is populated
by minotaurs, goristros, and quasits, all of which
appear in the Monster Manual.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties),
Baphomet can take one of the following lair
actions; he can’t take the same lair action two
rounds in a row:
Illusory Room. Baphomet casts mirage arcane,
affecting a room within the lair
that is no larger in any dimension
than 100 feet. The effect ends on
the next initiative count 20. Cha­
risma is Baphomet’s spellcasting
ability for this spell.
Reverse Gravity. Baphomet
chooses a room within the lair
--col--
that is no larger in any dimension than 100 feet.
Until the next initiative count 20, gravity is re­
versed within that room. Any creatures or objects
in the room when this happens fall in the direction
of the new pull of gravity, unless they have some
means of remaining aloft. Baphomet can ignore
the gravity reversal if he’s in the room, although
he likes to use this action to land on a ceiling to
attack targets flying near it.
Seal the Way. Baphomet seals one doorway or
other entryway within the lair. The opening must
be unoccupied. It is filled with solid stone for
1 minute or until Baphomet takes this lair ac­
tion again.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 57

=== PAGE 58 ===
Regional Effects
The region containing Baphomet’s lair is warped
by his magic, creating one or more of the follow­
ing effects:
Beguiling Realm. Within 6 miles of the lair, all
Charisma (Persuasion) and Charisma (Perfor­
mance) checks have disadvantage, and all Cha­
risma (Deception) and Charisma (Intimidation)
checks have advantage.
Hedge Mazes. Plant life within 1 mile of the lair
grows thick and forms walls of trees, hedges, and
other flora in the form of small mazes.
Panicked Beasts. Beasts within 1 mile of the lair
become frightened and disoriented, as though con
stantly under threat of being hunted, and might
lash out or panic even when no visible threat
is nearby.
If Baphomet dies, these effects fade over the course
of Id 10 days.
