in that area must make a DC 11 Constitution saving throw. On
a failed save, the creature takes 7 (2d6) radiant damage and is
blinded until the end of its next turn. On a successful save, the
creature takes half as much damage and isn’t blinded.
Actions
Multiattack. The darkling elder makes two Scimitar attacks.
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: 4-5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (1 d6 4- 3) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) necrotic damage.
Darkness (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The darkling
elder casts darkness, requiring no spell components and using
Wisdom as the spellcasting ability.

=== PAGE 85 ===
Death Kiss
A death kiss is a lesser beholder that can
come into being when a true beholder has
a vivid nightmare about losing blood. Its
coloration and shape resemble those of the
beholder that dreamed it into existence,
but its hue is more muted, and instead of magical
eye rays, it has ten long tentacles, each ending in a
mouth full of teeth. It can speak through any of its
tentacle-maws in a high-pitched, nasal voice.
Death kisses fear true beholders, which can easily
kill or subdue them. Lacking the egotism of their
stronger kin, a death kiss usually submits to the
rule of its creator or any other beholder it encoun­
ters, but it tries to escape as soon as the beholder is
preoccupied.
A death kiss consumes ingested blood, which it
also uses to heal and generate electrical energy
inside its body. Terrified of dying from starvation,
it obsessively drains even little creatures such as
rats, leaving behind a trail of bloodless corpses.
When underground, it uses its tentacles as feelers,
prodding and examining the environment in all di­
rections. Above ground, it usually keeps its tentacles
retracted when on the hunt, then lashes out with
them to catch opponents off guard.
A death kiss lacks the combat finesse and intel­
ligence of a true beholder. In most cases, it simply
latches on to its prey with one or more of its tenta­
cles and drains blood until the prey collapses. If it’s
in a superior position and its foe poses no threat, it
might toy with its food, drawing out its prey’s death.
A death kiss prefers to hunt alone. If it meets
another of its kind, it might fight, flee, or team up,
depending on its health and pride.
--col--
Death Kiss
Large Aberration (Beholder), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 142 (15dl0 + 60)
Speed 0 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 14 (+2) 18 (+4) 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 10 (+0)
Saving Throws Con +8, Wis +5
Skills Perception +5
Damage Immunities lightning
Condition Immunities prone
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Lightning Blood. A creature within 5 feet of the death kiss takes
5 (IdlO) lightning damage whenever it hits the death kiss with
a melee attack that deals piercing or slashing damage.
Actions
Multiattack. The death kiss makes three Tentacle attacks. Up
to three of these attacks can be replaced by Blood Drain—one
replacement per tentacle grappling a creature.
Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 20 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage, and the target is grap­
pled (escape DC 14) if it is a Huge or smaller creature. Until
this grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the death kiss
can’t use the same tentacle on another target. The death kiss
has ten tentacles.
Blood Drain. One creature grappled by a tentacle of the death
kiss must make a DC 16 Constitution saving throw. On a failed
save, the target takes 22 (4dl0) lightning damage, and the
death kiss regains half as many hit points.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 85

=== PAGE 86 ===
The forging of a pact between a warlock and a pa­
tron is no minor occasion—at least not for the war­
lock. The consequences of breaking that pact can
dire and, in some cases, lethal. A warlock who fail
to live up to a bargain with an evil patron runs the
risk of rising from the dead as a deathlock, a foul
Undead driven to serve its otherworldly patron.
An powerful necromancer might also discover th
wicked methods of creating a deathlock and then
subjugate it, acting as the deathlock’s patron.
Deathlqgk
An overpowering urge to serve consumes the mind
of a newly awakened deathlock. Any goals and am­
bitions it had in life that don’t please its patron fall
away as its master’s desires become the purpose
that drives it. The deathlock immediately resumes
work on its patron’s behalf.
Whatever the goal, it always reflects the patron’s
interests, ranging from small-scale concerns to
matters of cosmic scope. A deathlock in the thrall
a Fiend might work to destroy a specific temple de
icated to a good god, while one that serves a Great
Old One might hunt for the materials needed to cal
forth a horrifying entity into the world. To accom­
plish a difficult goal, the deathlock might be forced
Ml to serve another powerful creature or might need t
lAj gather servants of its own.
86 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Deathlock Mastermind
Though deathlocks exist to serve their patrons, they
retain some freedom when it comes to devising
tactics and carrying out plans. Powerful deathlocks
recruit lesser creatures to help them carry out their
missions, becoming the masterminds behind vast
conspiracies and intrigues that culminate in the ac­
complishment of great acts of evil.
Deathlock Wight
Deprived of much of its magic as a special punish­
ment, a deathlock wight lingers between the war­
lock it was and the wretched existence of a wight.
Deathlock
Medium Undead (Warlock), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor)
Hit Points 36 (8d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
11 (+0) 15 (+2) 10 (+0) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 16 (+3)
r­
be Saving Throws Int +4, Cha +5
ls Skills Arcana +4, History +4
Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical attacks that aren't silvered
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned
he Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Turn Resistance. The deathlock has advantage on saving throws
against any effect that turns Undead.
d
Unusual Nature. The deathlock doesn’t require air, food,
m­ drink, or sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The deathlock makes two Deathly Claw or Grave
Bolt attacks.
Deathly Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) necrotic damage.
of
Crave Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 120 ft., one
ed­ target. Hit: 14 (2dl0 + 3) necrotic damage.
Spellcasting. The deathlock casts one of the following spells,
ll
using Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 13):
At will: detect magic, disguise self, mage armor, mage hand
d
1/day each: dispel magic, hunger of Hadar, invisibility,
to spider climb
______________________:i_._____ ___1... 1

=== PAGE 87 ===
Deathlock Mastermind
Armor Class 13 (16 with mage armor)
Hit Points 110 (20d8 + 20)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
11 (+0) 16 (+3) 12 (+1) 15 (+2) 12 (+1) 17 (+3)
Saving Throws I nt +5, Cha +6
Skills Arcana +5, History +5, Perception +4
Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the deathlock’s
darkvision.
Turn Resistance. The deathlock has advantage on saving throws
against any effect that turns Undead.
Unusual Nature. The deathlock doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The deathlock makes two Deathly Claw or Grave
Bolt attacks.
Deathly Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 13 (3d6 + 3 necrotic damage).
Grave Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +6 to hit, range 120 ft., one
target. Hit: 13 (3d8) necrotic damage. If the target is Large or
smaller, it must succeed on a DC 16 Strength saving throw or
become restrained as shadowy tendrils wrap around it for 1
minute. A restrained target can use its action to repeat the sav­
ing throw, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Spellcasting. The deathlock casts one of the following spells,
using Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 14):
At will: detect magic, disguise self, mage armor, minor illusion
1/day each: darkness, dimension door, dispel magic, fly, invisibility
--col--
Deathlock Wight }
Medium Undead (Warlock), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor)
Hit Points 37 (5d8 + 15)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
11 (+0) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 12 (+1) 14 (+2) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Wis +4
Skills Arcana +3, Perception +4
Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the deathlock has dis­
advantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on sight.
Unusual Nature. The deathlock doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The deathlock makes two Life Drain or Crave
Bolt attacks.
Life Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 6 (1 d8 + 2) necrotic damage. The target must
succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw, or its hit point
maximum is reduced by an amount equal to the damage taken.
This reduction lasts until the target finishes a long rest. The
target dies if its hit point maximum is reduced to 0.
A Humanoid slain by this attack rises 24 hours later as a zom­
bie (see the Monster Manual) under the deathlock’s control,
unless the Humanoid is restored to life or its body is destroyed.
The deathlock can have no more than twelve zombies under its
control at one time.
Crave Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 60 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) necrotic damage.
Spellcasting. The deathlock casts one of the following spells,
using Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 13):
At will: detect magic, disguise self, mage armor
1/day each: fear, hold person
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 87

=== PAGE 88 ===
Deep scions began life as people who were stol
from shore or saved from sinking ships and off
a terrible bargain by an undersea power: surren
body and soul, or drown. Those who submit are
jected to an ancient ritual widespread among ev
aquatic creatures. Its methods are painful and t
result never certain, but when it works, the mag
transforms an air-breathing person into a shap
shifter that can take on an aquatic form.
A deep scion emerges from the depths in serv
to their underwater master, which is likely a kra
or some other ancient being of the deep. While
wearing the mind and body of the person they o
were as a sort of mask, the creature is bent on f
filling their master’s desires. Sometimes a deep
scion returns to their former home—unexpected
found alive when all hope was lost. At other tim
the deep scion takes on a new identity. In any c
it is the deep scion’s duty to infiltrate the air-bre
ing world and report back to their master. When
set to this task, a deep scion worms their way in
the life of an unsuspecting enemy as a new frien
lover, the perfect candidate for a job, or some ot
role that enables the minion to carry out their m
jS. ter’s commands.
88 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
The training to which a deep scion is subjected
rids it of empathy for those they spy on. Though a
deep scion might behave as though infatuated, laugh
at the joke of a friend, or appear incensed at some
injustice, each of these acts is artificial to the deep
scion, a means to an end. The creature believes that
their true form is the shape they take when they
return to the sea they think of as home. Ironically,
however, a deep scion that is killed when in their
piscine form is stripped of the magic that enabled
them to transform, leaving behind the corpse of the
person the deep scion once was.
Deep Scion
Medium Monstrosity, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 67 (9d8 + 27)
Speed 30 ft. (20 ft. and swim 40 ft. in hybrid form)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 13 (+1) 16 (+3) 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 14 (+2)
Saving Throws Wis +3, Cha +4
Skills Deception +6, Insight +3, Sleight of Hand +3, Stealth +3
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Aquan, Common, thieves' cant
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Amphibious (Hybrid Form Only). The deep scion can breathe
air and water.
Actions
len
Multiattack. The deep scion makes two Battleaxe attacks, or it
fered
makes one Bite attack and two Claw attacks.
nder,
Battleaxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
e sub­
get. Hit: 8 (1 d8 + 4) slashing damage, or 9 (IdlO + 4) slashing
vil
damage if used with two hands.
the
Bite (Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach
gic
5 ft., one creature. Hit: 6 (1 d4 + 4) piercing damage.
pe­
Claw (Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit,
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1 d6 + 4) slashing damage.
vice
aken Psychic Screech (Hybrid Form Only; Recharges after a Short
or Long Rest). The deep scion emits a terrible scream audible
within 300 feet. Creatures within 30 feet of the deep scion must
once
succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom saving throw or be stunned until
ful­
the end of the deep scion’s next turn.
p
In water, the psychic screech also telepathically transmits
dly the deep scion’s memories of the last 24 hours to its master,
mes regardless of distance, so long as it and its master are in the
case, same body of water.
eath­
Bonus Actions
n
nto
Change Shape. The deep scion transforms into a hybrid form
(humanoid-piscine) or back into its true form, which is hu­
nd, a
manlike. Its statistics, other than its speed, are the same in
ther
each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn’t trans­
mas- formed. The deep scion reverts to its true form if it dies.

=== PAGE 89 ===
Demogorgon
Prince of Demons, the Sibilant Beast, and Master
of the Spiraling Depths, Demogorgon is the embod­
iment of chaos, confusion, and destruction, seeking
to corrupt all that is good and undermine order in
the multiverse, to see everything dragged howling
into the infinite depths of the Abyss.
The demon lord is a meld of different forms. He
has a saurian lower body and clawed, webbed feet;
suckered tentacles sprout from the shoulders of his
great apelike torso, which is surmounted by two hid
eous simian heads named Aameul and Hathradiah.
Their gaze brings bewilderment and confusion to
any who confront them.
Similarly, the spiraling Y sign of Demogorgon’s
cult drives those who contemplate it for too long to
delirium. As a result, all followers of the Prince of
Demons break with reality sooner or later.
Demogorgon’s Lair
Demogorgon makes his lair in a palace called
Abysm, found on a layer of the Abyss known as the
Gaping Maw. Demogorgon’s lair is a place of confu­
sion and duality; the portion of the palace that lies
above water takes the form of two serpentine tow­
ers, each crowned by a skull-shaped minaret. There,
Demogorgon’s heads contemplate the mysteries of
the arcane while arguing about how best to obliter­
ate their rivals. The bulk of this palace extends deep
underwater, in chill and darkened caverns.
--col--
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), Demo­
gorgon can take one of the following lair actions; he
can’t take the same lair action two rounds in a row:
Darkness. Demogorgon casts the darkness spell
four times, targeting different areas with the spell.
Demogorgon doesn’t need to concentrate on the
spells, which end on initiative count 20 of the
next round.
Illusory Duplicate. Demogorgon creates an illu­
sory duplicate of himself, which appears in his
space and lasts until initiative count 20 of the next
round. On his turn, Demogorgon can move the
illusory duplicate a distance equal to his walk­
ing speed (no action required). The first time a
creature or an object interacts physically with De­
mogorgon (for example, by hitting him with an at­
tack), there is a 50 percent chance that the illusory
duplicate is affected, not Demogorgon, in which
case the illusion disappears.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY

=== PAGE 90 ===
Regional Effects
The region containing Demogorgon’s lair is warped
by his magic, creating one or more of the follow­
ing effects:
Beguiling Realm. Within 6 miles of the lair, all
Charisma (Persuasion) and Charisma (Perfor­
mance) checks have disadvantage, and all Cha­
risma (Deception) and Charisma (Intimidation)
checks have advantage.
Frenzied Animals. Beasts within 1 mile of the
lair become frenzied and violent—even creatures
that are normally docile. Within that area, any
ability check involving Animal Handling has
disadvantage.
Venomous Beasts. The area within 6 miles of
the lair becomes overpopulated with poisonous
snakes and other venomous Beasts.
If Demogorgon dies, these effects fade over the
course of Id 10 days.
Demogorgon
Huge Fiend (Demon), Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 22 (natural armor)
Hit Points 464 (32dl2 + 256)
Speed 50 ft., swim 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
29 (+9) 14 (+2) 26 (+8) 20 (+5) 17 (+3) 25 (+7)
Saving Throws Dex +10, Con +16, Wis +11, Cha +15
Skills Insight +11, Perception +19
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing that is nonmagical
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 29
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 26 (90,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +8
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Demogorgon fails a saving
throw, he can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Demogorgon has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Two Heads. Demogorgon has advantage on saving throws
against being blinded, deafened, stunned, or knocked
unconscious.
Actions
Multiattack. Demogorgon makes two Tentacle attacks. He can
replace one attack with a use of Gaze.
Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 28 (3 d 12 + 9) force damage. If the target is a creature,
it must succeed on a DC 23 Constitution saving throw, or its h
point maximum is reduced by an amount equal to the damage
90 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Cultists of Demogorgon
d
Demogorgon’s followers are typically lone killers
driven by the whispering voice of their master.
His most blessed followers gain the Two Minds of
Chaos trait.
Two Minds of Chaos. This creature has advantage on all Intelli­
gence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws.
taken. This reduction lasts until the target finishes a long rest.
The target dies if its hit point maximum is reduced to 0.
Caze. Demogorgon turns his magical gaze toward one creature
he can see within 120 feet of him. The target must succeed on
a DC 23 Wisdom saving throw or suffer one of the following
effects (choose one or roll a d6):
1-2: Beguiling Gaze. The target is stunned until the start of
Demogorgon’s next turn or until Demogorgon is no longer
within line of sight.
3-4: Confusing Caze. The target suffers the effect of the confu­
sion spell without making a saving throw. The effect lasts un­
til the start of Demogorgon’s next turn. Demogorgon doesn’t
need to concentrate on the spell.
5-6: Hypnotic Caze. The target is charmed by Demogorgon
until the start of Demogorgon’s next turn. Demogorgon
chooses how the charmed target uses its action, reaction,
and movement.
Spellcasting. Demogorgon casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 23):
At will: detect magic, major image
3/day each: dispel magic, fear, telekinesis
1/day each: feeblemind, project image
Legendary Actions
Demogorgon can take 2 legendary actions, choosing from
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be
used at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn.
Demogorgon regains spent legendary actions at the start
of his turn.
n
Caze. Demogorgon uses Caze and must use either Beguiling
Gaze or Confusing Gaze.
­ Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
, Hit: 20 (2dl0 + 9) bludgeoning damage plus 11 (2dl0) ne­
hit crotic damage.
Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). Demogorgon uses Spellcasting.

=== PAGE 91 ===
Derro
Derro slink through the subterranean
realms, seeking places that are safe
from the perils of the Underdark.
Equal parts fearful and vicious, bands
of these dwarf-kin prey on those
weaker than themselves, while giving
