accurate memories. None of them can remember
the origin of the first kenku, however, and they often
joke that there are as many kenku origin stories as
there are kenku. Some of them paint their genesis
as a curse, being a flightless bird people doomed to
mimic other people’s creations. Other kenku recite
cryptic but beautiful poems about their advent being
a blessed event in which they were sent into the mul­
tiverse to observe and catalog its many wonders.
Whatever their true origin, kenku are most often
found in the Shadowfell and the Material Plane, and
they tend to have the coloration typical of ravens.
Kenku Traits
As a kenku, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. Your size is Medium or Small. You choose
the size when you select this race.
24 CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Expert Duplication. When you copy writing or
craftwork produced by yourself or someone else,
you have advantage on any ability checks you make
to produce an exact duplicate.
Kenku Recall. Thanks to your supernaturally
good memory, you have proficiency in two skills of
your choice.
Moreover, when you make an ability check using
any skill in which you have proficiency, you can give
yourself advantage on the check before rolling the
d20. You can give yourself advantage in this way a
number of times equal to your proficiency bonus,
and you regain all expended uses when you finish a
long rest.
Mimicry. You can accurately mimic sounds you
have heard, including voices. A creature that hears
the sounds you make can tell they are imitations
only with a successful Wisdom (Insight) check
against a DC of 8 + your proficiency bonus + your
Charisma modifier.

=== PAGE 25 ===
Kobold
Some of the smallest draconic creatures in the
multiverse, kobolds display their draconic ances­
try in the glint of their scales and in their roars.
Legends tell of the first kobolds emerging from the
Underdark near the lairs of the earliest dragons.
In some lands, kobolds serve chromatic or metallic
dragons—even worshiping them as divine beings.
In other places, kobolds know too well how danger­
ous those dragons can be and help others defend
against draconic destruction.
Whatever their relationship to dragons, kobold
scales tend to be rust colored, although the occa­
sional kobold sports a scale color more akin to that
of a chromatic or a metallic dragon. A kobold’s cry
can express a range of emotion: anger, resolve,
elation, fear, and more. Regardless of the emotion
expressed, their cry resonates with draconic power.
Kobold Traits
As a kobold, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Small.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Draconic Cry. As a bonus action, you let out a cry
at your enemies within 10 feet of you. Until the start
of your next turn, you and your allies have advan­
tage on attack rolls against any of those enemies
who could hear you. You can use this trait a number
of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you re­
gain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.
Kobold Legacy. Kobolds’ connection to dragons
can manifest in unpredictable ways in an individual
kobold. Choose one of the following legacy options
for your kobold:
--col--
Craftiness. You have proficiency in one of the fol­
lowing skills of your choice: Arcana, Investigation,
Medicine, Sleight of Hand, or Survival.
Defiance. You have advantage on saving throws to
avoid or end the frightened condition on yourself.
Draconic Sorcery. You know one cantrip of your
choice from the sorcerer spell list. Intelligence,
Wisdom, or Charisma is your spellcasting ability
for that cantrip (choose when you select this race).
CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES 25

=== PAGE 26 ===
Lizardfolk
The saurian lizardfolk are thought by some sages to
be distant cousins of dragonborn and kobolds. De­
spite their resemblance to those other scaled folk,
however, lizardfolk are their own people and have
lived on the worlds of the Material Plane since the
worlds’ creation. Gifted by the gods with remarkable
physical defenses and a mystical connection to the
natural world, lizardfolk can survive with just their
wits in situations that would be deadly for other folk.
Because of that fact, many lizardfolk myths state
that their people were placed by the gods in the Ma­
terial Plane to guard its natural wonders.
Lizardfolk have colorful scales and exhibit a wide
array of scale patterns. Their individual facial fea­
tures are as varied as those of lizards.
Lizardfolk Traits
As a lizardfolk, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet, and
you have a swimming speed equal to your
walking speed.
26 CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
Bite. You have a fanged maw that you can use to
make unarmed strikes. When you hit with it, the
strike deals ld6 + your Strength modifier slashing
damage, instead of the bludgeoning damage normal
for an unarmed strike.
Hold Breath. You can hold your breath for up to
15 minutes at a time.
e
HungryJaws. You can throw yourself into a feed­
ing frenzy. As a bonus action, you can make a spe­
cial attack with your Bite. If the attack hits, it deals
.
its normal damage, and you gain temporary hit
points equal to your proficiency bonus. You can use
this trait a number of times equal to your proficiency
bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you
finish a long rest.
Natural Armor. You have tough, scaly skin. When
you aren’t wearing armor, your base AC is 13 + your
Dexterity modifier. You can use your natural armor
to determine your AC if the armor you wear would
leave you with a lower AC. A shield’s benefits apply
as normal while you use your natural armor.
Nature's Intuition. Thanks to your mystical con­
nection to nature, you gain proficiency with two of
the following skills of your choice: Animal Handling,
Medicine, Nature, Perception, Stealth, or Survival.

=== PAGE 27 ===
Minotaur
Minotaurs are barrel-chested humanoids
with heads resembling those of bulls.
Blessed with a supernaturally strong sense
of direction, minotaurs make great navigators.
Some sages believe minotaurs were first created by
the Lady of Pain to patrol the magical mazes that
she uses to trap her foes.
Minotaur horns range in size from about 1 foot
long to easily three times that length. Minotaurs
often carve their horns to sharpen their edges,
etch symbols of power into them, or sheathe
them in bronze to prevent them from shattering
during battle.
Thick hair extends down minotaurs’ necks and
powerful backs, and some have long patches of hair
on their chins and cheeks. Their legs end in heavy,
cloven hooves, and they have long, tufted tails.
Minotaur Traits
As a minotaur, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Horns. You have horns that you can use to make
unarmed strikes. When you hit with them, the
strike deals ld6 + your Strength modifier piercing
damage, instead of the bludgeoning damage normal
for an unarmed strike.
--col--
Goring Rush. Immediately after you take the
Dash action on your turn and move at least 20 feet,
you can make one melee attack with your Horns as
a bonus action.
Hammering Horns. Immediately after you hit a
creature with a melee attack as part of the Attack
action on your turn, you can use a bonus action to
attempt to push that target with your horns. The
target must be within 5 feet of you and no more
than one size larger than you. Unless it succeeds
on a Strength saving throw against a DC equal to 8
+ your proficiency bonus + your Strength modifier,
you push it up to 10 feet away from you.
Labyrinthine Recall. You always know which di­
rection is north, and you have advantage on any Wis­
dom (Survival) check you make to navigate or track.
CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES

=== PAGE 28 ===
Orc
Orcs trace their creation to the one-eyed god
Gruumsh, an unstoppable warrior and powerful
leader. The divine qualities of Gruumsh resonate
within orcs, granting them a reflection of his tough­
ness and tenacity that can’t be matched, and the
god equipped his children to be able to live above or
below ground.
On some worlds, such as Eberron, orcs were
among the first defenders of the natural order from
the encroachments of Fiends and other extrapla-
nar threats. Gruumsh’s blessings have made orcs
tireless guardians and mighty allies wherever they
are found, even when they turn their devotion to
other gods.
Orc Traits
As an orc, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
--col--
Adrenaline Rush. You can take the Dash action
as a bonus action. You can use this trait a number
of times equal to your proficiency bonus, and you re­
gain all expended uses when you finish a long rest.
Whenever you use this trait, you gain a num­
ber of temporary hit points equal to your profi­
ciency bonus.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Powerful Build. You count as one size larger
when determining your carrying capacity and the
weight you can push, drag, or lift.
Relentless Endurance. When you are reduced to
0 hit points but not killed outright, you can drop to
1 hit point instead. Once you use this trait, you can’t
do so again until you finish a long rest.

=== PAGE 29 ===
Satyr
Originating in the Feywild—a realm of pure emo­
tion-satyrs thrive on the energy of merriment. They
resemble elves but have goatlike legs, cloven hooves,
and ram or goat horns. The magic of the fey realm
has given them an innate ability to perform, to de­
light, and to resist magical intrusion. While they’re
usually found in the Feywild, satyrs do wander to
other planes of existence, most often to the Material
Plane. There they seek to bring a bit of their home
plane’s splendor to other worlds.
Satyr Traits
As a satyr, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Fey.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 35 feet.
ANADRQj
EKIM
--col--
Ram. You can use your head and horns to make
unarmed strikes. When you hit with them, the strike
deals ld6 + your Strength modifier bludgeoning
damage, instead of the bludgeoning damage normal
for an unarmed strike.
Magic Resistance. You have advantage on saving
throws against spells.
Mirthful Leaps. Whenever you make a long
jump or a high jump, you can roll a d8 and add the
number rolled to the number of feet you cover, even
when making a standing jump. This extra distance
costs movement as normal.
Reveler. As an embodiment of revelry, you have
proficiency in the Performance and Persuasion
skills, and you have proficiency with one musical
instrument of your choice.
CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES 29

=== PAGE 30 ===
Sea Elf
Sea elves fell in love with the wild beauty of the
ocean in the earliest days of the multiverse. While
other elves traveled from realm to realm, sea elves
navigated the currents and explored the waters
of many worlds. Today these elves can be found
wherever oceans exist, as well as in the Elemental
Plane of Water.
Like other elves, sea elves can live to be over 750
years old.
Sea Elf Traits
As a sea elf, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid. You are also
considered an elf for any prerequisite or effect that
requires you to be an elf.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet, and
you have a swimming speed equal to your
walking speed.
Child of the Sea. You can breathe air and water,
and you have resistance to cold damage.
30 CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
Elves of Many Realms
Created by the god Corelion, the first elves were Fey
beings who cavorted on various planes of existence,
changing their physical forms at will. Outside the glory
of Arvandor, their favorite place was the Feywild—a
realm of unbridled passion. It was to that place of
splendors that elves fled after they were exiled from
Corellon’s presence for plotting with their god’s rival,
Lolth. And it was there that they transformed from
Fey creatures into Humanoids and lost their ability to
shape-shift at will. Afterward, they often wept as they
realized what they had lost, their sorrow made even
deeper by the Feywild’s influence. But in the Feywild,
they also discovered the potential joys of being people
of fixed forms, and they rediscovered hope once they
renounced Lolth’s treachery.
Most elves eventually spread from the Feywild to
other worlds, as wanderlust and curiosity drove them
to the far reaches of the multiverse. In those other
worlds, elves developed the physical forms now as­
sociated with them. Because of their original mutable
nature, each group of elves mystically took on charac­
teristics of the environment with which they bonded,
whether forests (wood elves), fey crossings in the
Material Plane (high elves), the Underdark (drow),
the Shadowfell (shadar-kai), the Feywild (eladrin), or
oceans (sea elves).
In some places, Corellon has passed from elves’
memory, but the god’s blood flows within them still,
even if they know nothing of its source. That blood is
what causes them to evolve after spending centuries
connected to a particular environment, so it is only a
matter of time before other kinds of elves emerge.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving
throws you make to avoid or end the charmed condi­
tion on yourself.
Friend of the Sea. Aquatic animals have an
extraordinary affinity with your people. You can
communicate simple ideas to any Beast that has a
swimming speed. It can understand your words,
though you have no special ability to understand it
in return.
Keen Senses. You have proficiency in the Percep­
tion skill.
Trance. You don’t need to sleep, and magic can’t
put you to sleep. You can finish a long rest in 4
hours if you spend those hours in a trancelike medi­
tation, during which you retain consciousness.
Whenever you finish this trance, you can gain two
proficiencies that you don’t have, each one with a
weapon or a tool of your choice selected from the
Player’s Handbook. You mystically acquire these
proficiencies by drawing them from shared elven
memory, and you retain them until you finish your
next long rest.

=== PAGE 31 ===
Shadar-kai
Shadar-kai are the elves of the
Shadowfell, originally drawn to that
dread realm by the Raven Queen.
Over the centuries, some of them have
continued to serve her, while others have
ventured into the Material Plane to forge
their own destinies.
Once shadar-kai were Fey like the rest of their
elven kin; now they exist in a state between life and
death, thanks to being transformed by the Shadow-
fell’s grim energy.
Shadar-kai have ashen skin tones, and while
they’re in the Shadowfell, they also become
wizened, reflecting the somber nature of that
gloomy plane.
Like other elves, shadar-kai can live to be over
750 years old.
Shadar-kai Traits
As a shadar-kai, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid. You are also
considered an elf for any prerequisite or effect that
requires you to be an elf.
Size. You are Medium. <|
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Blessing of the Raven Queen. As a bonus action,
you can magically teleport up to 30 feet to an un­
occupied space you can see. You can use this trait
a number of times equal to your proficiency bonus,
and you regain all expended uses when you finish a
long rest.
Starting at 3rd level, you also gain resistance
to all damage when you teleport using this trait.
The resistance lasts until the start of your next
turn. During that time, you appear ghostly and
translucent.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving
throws you make to avoid or end the charmed condi­
tion on yourself.
--col--
Keen Senses. You have proficiency in the Percep­
tion skill.
Necrotic Resistance. You have resistance to ne­
crotic damage.
Trance. You don’t need to sleep, and magic can’t
put you to sleep. You can finish a long rest in 4
hours if you spend those hours in a trancelike medi­
tation, during which you retain consciousness.
Whenever you finish this trance, you can gain two
proficiencies that you don’t have, each one with a
weapon or a tool of your choice selected from the
Player’s Handbook. You mystically acquire these
proficiencies by drawing them from shared elven
memory, and you retain them until you finish your
next long rest.
CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES 31

=== PAGE 32 ===
Shifter
Shifters are sometimes called weretouched, as they
are descendants of people who contracted full or
partial lycanthropy. Humanoids with a bestial as­
pect, shifters can’t fully change shape, but they can
temporarily enhance their animalistic features by
entering a state they call shifting.
Shifters are similar to humans in height and build
but are typically more lithe and flexible. Their facial
features have a bestial cast, often with large eyes
and pointed ears; most shifters also have prominent
canine teeth. They grow fur-like hair on nearly every
part of their bodies. While a shifter’s appearance
might remind an onlooker of an animal, they remain
clearly identifiable as shifters even when at their
most feral.
Most shifters resemble a particular kind of ly-
canthrope. You can choose the kind of lycanthrope
in your past, or you can determine it randomly by
rolling on the Lycanthrope Ancestor table. The table
also provides a suggestion for the Shifting option
you might have as a result of your ancestry.
32 CHAPTER 1 | FANTASTICAL RACES
--col--
Lycanthrope Ancestor
d6 Ancestor Suggested Shifting Option
1 Werebear Beasthide
2 Wereboar Beasthide
3 Wererat Swiftstride
4 Weretiger Swiftstride
5 Werewolf (wolflike) Longtooth
6 Werewolf (doglike) Wildhunt
Shifter Traits
As a shifter, you have the following racial traits.
Creature Type. You are a Humanoid.
Size. You are Medium.
Speed. Your walking speed is 30 feet.
Bestial Instincts. Channeling the beast within,
you have proficiency in one of the following skills
of your choice: Acrobatics, Athletics, Intimidation,
or Survival.
Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60
feet of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness
as if it were dim light. You discern colors in that
darkness only as shades of gray.
Shifting. As a bonus action, you can assume a
more bestial appearance. This transformation lasts
for 1 minute, until you die, or until you revert to your
normal appearance as a bonus action. When you
shift, you gain temporary hit points equal to 2 x your
proficiency bonus. You can shift a number of times
equal to your proficiency bonus, and you regain all
expended uses when you finish a long rest.
Whenever you shift, you gain an additional benefit
based on one of the following options (choose when
you select this race):
Beasthide. You gain ld6 additional temporary hit
points. While shifted, you have a +1 bonus to your
Armor Class.
Longtooth. When you shift and as a bonus action
on your other turns while shifted, you can use
your elongated fangs to make an unarmed strike.
If you hit with your fangs, you can deal piercing
damage equal to ld6 + your Strength modifier,
instead of the bludgeoning damage normal for an
unarmed strike.
Swiftstride. While shifted, your walking speed in­
creases by 10 feet. Additionally, you can move up
to 10 feet as a reaction when a creature ends its
turn within 5 feet of you. This reactive movement
doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks.
Wildhunt. While shifted, you have advantage on
Wisdom checks, and no creature within 30 feet
of you can make an attack roll with advantage
against you unless you’re incapacitated.

=== PAGE 33 ===

--col--
Tabaxi
