Skills Stealth +8, Survival +6
Damage Vulnerabilities cold, fire
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical attacks
Condition Immunities blinded, deafened, exhaustion, grappled,
paralyzed, petrified, prone, restrained, unconscious
Senses blindsight 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages understands languages it knew in its previous form
but can’t speak
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
False Appearance. If the slithering tracker is motionless at the
start of combat, it has advantage on its initiative roll. Moreover,
if a creature hasn’t observed the slithering tracker move or act,
that creature must succeed on a DC 18 Intelligence (Investiga­
tion) check to discern that the slithering tracker isn’t a puddle.
Liquid Form. The slithering tracker can enter an enemy’s space
and stop there. It can also move through a space as narrow as 1
inch wide without squeezing.
Spider Climb. The slithering tracker can climb difficult surfaces,
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Actions
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (IdlO + 3) bludgeoning damage.
Life Leech. One Large or smaller creature that the slithering
tracker can see within 5 feet of it must succeed on a DC 13 Dex­
terity saving throw or be grappled (escape DC 13). Until this
grapple ends, the target is restrained and unable to breathe un­
less it can breathe water. In addition, the grappled target takes
16 (3dl 0) necrotic damage at the start of each of its turns. The
slithering tracker can grapple only one target at a time.
While grappling the target, the slithering tracker takes only
half any damage dealt to it (rounded down), and the target
takes the other half.
Bonus Actions
Watery Stealth. If underwater, the slithering tracker takes the
Hide action, and it makes the Dexterity (Stealth) check with
advantage.
--col--
Slithering Tracker
The quest for revenge sometimes leads those terri­
bly aggrieved to undergo a ritual whereby they trans­
form into bodies of semiliquid sentience known as
slithering trackers. Innocuous and insidious at the
same time, a slithering tracker flows into places
where a normal creature can’t go and brings its own
brand of watery death down on its quarry.
The ritual for creating a slithering tracker is
known to hags, liches, and priests who worship
gods of vengeance. It can be performed only on a
willing creature that hungers for revenge. The ritual
sucks all the moisture from the subject’s body, kill­
ing it. Yet the subject’s mind lives on in the puddle
that issues forth from the remains, and so too does
its insatiable need for retribution.
A slithering tracker tastes the ground it courses
over, seeking any trace of its prey. To kill, a slither­
ing tracker rises up and enshrouds a creature, at­
tempting to drown the creature while also draining
it of blood.
Achieving revenge against its target doesn’t end a
slithering tracker’s existence or its hunger for blood.
Some slithering trackers remain aware of their pur­
pose and extend their quest for vengeance to others,
such as anyone who supported or befriended the
original target. Most of the time, though, a tracker's
mind can’t cope with being trapped in liquid form,
unable to communicate, and driven by the desire for
blood; after fulfilling its duty, the overwhelmed crea­
ture attacks indiscriminately until it is destroyed.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 221

=== PAGE 222 ===
SORROWSWORN
The Shadowfell’s pervasive melancholy sometimes
gives rise to strange incarnations of the plane’s
bleak nature. Sorrowsworn embody the forms of
suffering inherent to the shadowy landscape and
visit horror on those who stumble into their midst.
Each sorrowsworn personifies a different aspect of
despair or distress.
Angry Sorrowswqrn
Relying on violence to sustain their existence, angry
sorrowsworn—sometimes called the Angry—grow
more powerful when their foes fight back. If a crea­
ture opts not to attack, though, this sorrowsworn
becomes confused, and its attacks weaken. It
also has two heads, which bicker with each other
incessantly.
Hungry Sorrowsworn
Horrible creatures with grasping claws and dis­
tended jaws, hungry sorrowsworn—also known as
the Hungry—do whatever is necessary to sate their
appetites. These greedy devourers stuff their maws
with flesh and drink in their victims’ screams. When
they finish, they lurch away while their bright eyes
resume the search for something else to consume.
Lonely Sorrowsworn
The sorrow of isolation afflicts many creatures that
lurk in the Shadowfell, but the need for companion­
ship is never manifested more dramatically than
in the lonely sorrowsworn—also called the Lonely.
When these sorrowsworn spot other creatures, they
feel keenly the need for interaction and launch their
harpoon-like arms to drag their victims closer.
Lost Sorrowsworn
The Shadowfell turns visitors around until they be­
come marooned in its twisted landscape. Lost sor­
rowsworn—often referred to as the Lost—are repre­
sentations of the anxiety and fear people experience
when they can’t find their way. These sorrowsworn
appear desperate and panicked.
Lost sorrowsworn grasp at any creatures they can
reach. A victim experiences a flood of fear and panic
as its mind buckles under the fury of this assault.
The harder a victim’s allies fight to break the grasp,
the more the victim suffers.
Wretched Sorrowsworn
Horrid little monsters, wretched sorrowsworn—or
the Wretched—gather in packs to scour the Shadow­
fell for prey. These desperate entities subsist on life
force; when they find a creature, they surge forward
to sink their fangs into their victims and drink deep.
222 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Angry Sorrowsworn
Medium Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 255 (30d8 + 120)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 10 (+0) 19 (+4) 8 (-1) 13 (+1) 6 (-2)
Skills Perception +11
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing while
in dim light or darkness
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 21
Languages Common
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Two Heads. The sorrowsworn has advantage on saving throws
against being blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, stunned,
or knocked unconscious.
Rising Anger. If another creature deals damage to the sorrow­
sworn, the sorrowsworn’s attack rolls have advantage until the
end of its next turn, and the first time it hits with a Hook attack
on its next turn, the attack’s target takes an extra 19 (3dl2)
psychic damage.
On its turn, the sorrowsworn has disadvantage on attack rolls
if no other creature has dealt damage to it since the end of its
last turn.
Actions
Multiattack. The sorrowsworn makes two Hook attacks.
Hook. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (2dl2 + 3) piercing damage.

=== PAGE 223 ===
Hungry Sorrowsworn
Medium Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 225 (30d8 + 90)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 10 (+0) 17 (+3) 6 (-2) 11 (+0) 6 (-2)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing while
in dim light or darkness
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Life Hunger. If a creature within 60 feet of the sorrowsworn
regains hit points, the sorrowsworn gains two benefits until
the end of its next turn: it has advantage on attack rolls, and its
Bite deals an extra 22 (4dl0) necrotic damage on a hit.
Actions
Multiattack. The sorrowsworn makes one Bite attack and one
Claw attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) piercing damage plus 13 (3d8) ne­
crotic damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 18 (4d6 + 4) slashing damage. If the target is Medium or
smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 16), and it is restrained until
the grapple ends. While grappling a creature, the sorrowsworn
can’t make a Claw attack.
--col--
Lonely Sorrowsworn
Medium Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 112 (15d8 + 45)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 12 (+1) 17 (+3) 6 (-2) 11 (+0) 6 (-2)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing while
in dim light or darkness
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Common
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Psychic Leech. At the start of each of the sorrowsworn’s turns,
each creature within 5 feet of it must succeed on a DC 15 Wis­
dom saving throw or take 10 (3d6) psychic damage.
Thrives on Company. The sorrowsworn has advantage on attack
rolls while it is within 30 feet of at least two other creatures. It
otherwise has disadvantage on attack rolls.
Actions__________________________________
Multiattack. The sorrowsworn makes one Harpoon Arm at­
tack, and it uses Sorrowful Embrace.
Harpoon Arm. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 60 ft.,
one target. Hit: 21 (4d8 + 3) piercing damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 15) if it is a Large or smaller creature. The
sorrowsworn has two harpoon arms and can grapple up to two
creatures at once.
Sorrowful Embrace. Each creature grappled by the sorrowsworn
must make a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw, taking 18 (4d8)
psychic damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one. In either case, the sorrowsworn pulls each of
those creatures up to 30 feet straight toward it.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
223

=== PAGE 224 ===
Lost Sorrowsworn
Medium Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 78 (12d8 + 24)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 12 (+1) 15 (+2) 6 (-2) 7 (-2) 5 (-3)
Skills Athletics +6
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing while
in dim light or darkness
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages Common
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Actions
Multiattack. The sorrowsworn makes two Arm Spike attacks.
Arm Spike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 14 (2dl0 + 3) piercing damage.
Embrace (Recharge 4-6). Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach
5 ft., one target. Hit: 25 (4dl0 + 3) piercing damage, and the
target is grappled (escape DC 14) if it is a Medium or smaller
creature. Until the grapple ends, the target is frightened, and it
takes 27 (6d8) psychic damage at the end of each of its turns.
The sorrowsworn can grapple only one creature at a time.
Reactions_______________________________
Tightening Embrace. If the sorrowsworn takes damage, the
creature grappled by Embrace takes 18 (4d8) psychic damage.
224 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Wretched Sorrowsworn
Small Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 10 (4d6 - 4)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
7 (-2) 12 (+1) 9(-l) 5 (-3) 6 (-2) 5 (-3)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing while
in dim light or darkness
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages —
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Wretched Pack Tactics. The sorrowsworn has advantage on
an attack roll against a creature if at least one of the sorrow-
sworn’s allies is within 5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t
incapacitated. The sorrowsworn otherwise has disadvantage on
attack rolls.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (IdlO + 1) piercing damage, and the sorrowsworn at­
taches to the target. While attached, the sorrowsworn can’t
attack, and at the start of each of the sorrowsworn’s turns, the
target takes 6 (IdlO + 1) necrotic damage.
The attached sorrowsworn moves with the target whenever
the target moves, requiring none of the sorrowsworn’s move­
ment. The sorrowsworn can detach itself by spending 5 feet of
its movement on its turn. A creature, including the target, can
use its action to detach the sorrowsworn.

=== PAGE 225 ===
Spawn of Kyuss
Medium Undead, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 76 (9d8 + 36)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 11 (+0) 18 (+4) 5 (-3) 7 (-2) 3 (-4)
Saving Throws Wis +1
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages understands the languages it knew in life but can’t
speak
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Regeneration. The spawn of Kyuss regains 10 hit points at the
start of its turn if it has at least 1 hit point and isn’t in sunlight
or a body of running water. If the spawn takes acid, fire, or
radiant damage, this trait doesn't function at the start of the
spawn’s next turn. The spawn is destroyed only if it starts its
turn with 0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate.
Worms. If the spawn of Kyuss is targeted by an effect that cures
disease or removes a curse, all the worms infesting it wither
away, and it loses its Burrowing Worm action.
Unusual Nature. The spawn of Kyuss requires no air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The spawn of Kyuss makes two Claw attacks, and
it uses Burrowing Worm.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (1 d6 + 3) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) necrotic damage.
Burrowing Worm. A worm launches from the spawn of Kyuss
at one Humanoid that the spawn can see within 10 feet of it.
The worm latches onto the target’s skin unless the target suc­
ceeds on a DC 11 Dexterity saving throw. The worm is a Tiny
Undead with AC 6, 1 hit point, a 2 (-4) in every ability score,
and a speed of 1 foot. While on the target’s skin, the worm
can be killed by normal means or scraped off using an action
(the spawn can use Burrowing Worm to launch a scraped-off
worm at a Humanoid it can see within 10 feet of the worm).
Otherwise, the worm burrows under the target’s skin at the
end of the target’s next turn, dealing 1 piercing damage to it. At
the end of each of its turns thereafter, the target takes 7 (2d6)
necrotic damage per worm infesting it (maximum of 1 Od6), and
if it drops to 0 hit points, it dies and then rises 10 minutes later
as a spawn of Kyuss. If a worm-infested target is targeted by
an effect that cures disease or removes a curse, all the worms
infesting it wither away.
--col--
Spawn of Kyuss
Kyuss was a high priest of Orcus (appears in this
book) who plundered corpses from necropolises to
create the first spawn of Kyuss. Even centuries after
Kyuss’s death, his malign disciples continue per­
forming the horrific rites he perfected.
From a distance or in poor light, a spawn of Ky­
uss looks like an ordinary zombie. As it comes into
clearer view, however, the scores of little green
worms crawling in and out of it become visible.
These worms jump onto nearby Humanoids and
burrow into their flesh. A worm that penetrates a
Humanoid body makes its way to the creature’s
brain. Once inside the brain, the worm kills its host
and animates the corpse, transforming it into a
spawn of Kyuss, which breeds more worms.
Spawn of Kyuss are expressions of Orcus’s intent
to replace all life with undeath. Left to its own de­
vices, a solitary spawn of Kyuss travels aimlessly.
If it stumbles across a living creature, the spawn
attacks with the sole intent of creating more spawn.
Whether spawn are dispersed or clustered, they re­
produce exponentially if nothing stops them.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 225

=== PAGE 226 ===
Star Spawn
The Material Plane represents only one small part
of the multiverse. Beyond the best-known planes of
existence lie realms alien to mortal life. Some are
so hostile that even a moment’s contact is enough to
break a mortal’s mind. Yet beings do exist that are
native to these realms: entities that are ever hunger­
ing, searching, warring, and sometimes dreaming.
These Elder Evils are far older than most of the
mortal peoples and always inimical to such crea­
tures’ minds.
However much they might desire to enter and
dominate the Material Plane, the Elder Evils are
unable or unwilling to leave their realms. Some are
imprisoned in their dimensions by external forces,
some are inextricably bound to their home realities,
and others simply can’t find any way out.
The creatures known as star spawn are the her­
alds, servants, and soldiers of the Elder Evils, capa­
ble of taking on forms that can journey to the Mate­
rial Plane. They arrive most often in the wake of a
comet—or perhaps this phenomenon merely signals
that star spawn are in the vicinity and available for
communication. When the signs are right, cultists
gather together, read aloud their blasphemous texts,
and conduct the mind-searing rituals that guide star
spawn into the world.
Elder Evil Blessings
Disciples of certain Elder Evils can bestow super­
natural gifts on those who serve that cult, including
star spawn. The following powers are unique to spe­
cific cults; typically a creature has only one.
Cult of Atropus, the World Born Dead
Gaze of Corruption (Recharge 6). The cultist targets one crea­
ture it can see within 30 feet of it. The target must succeed on
a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or take 16 (3dl0) necrotic
damage and be poisoned for 1 minute. The poisoned target
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, end­
ing the effect on itself on a success.
Cult of Borem of the Lake of Boiling Mud
Borem’s Embrace (1/Day). The cultist touches one creature
within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 15 Dexter­
ity saving throw or be coated in sticky, steaming mud. While it
is coated in this way, the target’s speed is halved, it can’t use
reactions, and it takes 10 (3d6) fire damage at the start of each
of its turns. The effect lasts for 1 minute, until the cultist is in­
capacitated or dies, or until the target is immersed in water.
226 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Cult of Haask, the Voice of Hargut
Haask’s Presence (1/Day). The cultist transforms into a Tiny,
slug-like being and teleports onto the shoulder of a Human­
oid that it can see within 30 feet of it. The targeted Human­
oid must succeed on a DC 15 Charisma saving throw or be
charmed by the cultist. While the target is charmed, the cultist
has control of it on the target’s next turn. At the end of that
turn, the cultist teleports to an unoccupied space it can see
within 30 feet of it and returns to its normal form. The cultist
can’t be targeted directly by any attack or other effect while
it’s in the slug-like form, but it is subject to areas of effect
as normal.
Cult of Tharizdun, the Chained Cod
Tharizdun’s Spark (Recharge 6). As a bonus action, the cultist
touches a simple or martial weapon or a natural weapon, if it
has one. The next creature hit by the touched weapon must
succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or have disadvan­
tage on all ability checks. The affected creature can repeat the
saving throw at the end of each minute, ending the effect on
itself on a success.
Cult of Tyranthraxus, the Flamed One
Radiant Flames (1/Day). Multihued flame surrounds the cultist
for 1 minute, until the cultist is incapacitated or dies, or until
the cultist extinguishes the flame (no action required). While
inflamed, the cultist has telepathy with a range of 30 feet, and
it can teleport as a bonus action up to 30 feet to an unoccupied
space it can see. In addition, every creature that starts its turn
within 5 feet of the cultist must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving
throw, taking 16 (3dl0) radiant damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one.
Star Spawn Grue
Fanged and lipless, the ever-grinning, eerily staring
grue lopes about on spindly legs and long arms.
Bristles and spines project from odd patches of
its grayish skin, and its long fingers end in bro­
ken and dirty nails. Grues are the weakest of the
star spawn. A host of writhing, scrambling grues
typically accompanies more powerful star spawn.
Their constant chittering and shrieking produce
discordant psychic energy that disrupts thought pat­
terns in other creatures, which experience flashing
colors, hallucinations, disorientation, and waves of
hopelessness.
Star Spawn Hulk
The hulk is one of the largest of the known star
spawn, with glistening, translucent skin. Pale and
seemingly lidless eyes glare balefully from a face
distorted by too many teeth and too little nose.
Hulks are seldom encountered without a com­
manding star spawn seer (also in this book) nearby.
A hulk appears to have little will of its own and is
driven to protect its master.

=== PAGE 227 ===
Star Spawn Grue
Small Aberration, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 11
Hit Points 17 (5d6)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
6 (-2) 13 (+1) 10 (+0) 9 (-1) 11 (+0) 6 (-2)
Damage Immunities psychic
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Deep Speech
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Aura of Shrieks. Creatures within 20 feet of the grue that aren’t
Aberrations have disadvantage on saving throws, as well as on
attack rolls against creatures other than a star spawn grue.
Actions
Confounding Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) piercing damage, and the target
must succeed on a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw or attack rolls
against it have advantage until the start of the grue’s next turn.
--col--
Large Aberration, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 136 (13dl0 + 65)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
20 (+5) 8 (-1) 21 (+5) 7 (-2) 12 (+1) 9 (-1)
Saving Throws Dex +3, Wis +5
Skills Perception +5
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical attacks
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Deep Speech
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Psychic Mirror. If the hulk takes psychic damage, each creature
within 10 feet of the hulk takes that damage instead; the hulk
takes none of the damage. In addition, the hulk’s thoughts and
location can’t be discerned by magic.
Actions
Multiattack. The hulk makes two Slam attacks. If both attacks
hit the same target, the target also takes 9 (2d8) psychic dam­
age and must succeed on a DC 17 Constitution saving throw or
be stunned until the end of the target’s next turn.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) bludgeoning damage.
Reaping Arms (Recharge 5-6). The hulk makes a separate Slam
attack against each creature within 10 feet of it. Each creature
