turbing in their workmanship. His lair and those of
his cultists are pleasure palaces where nothing is
forbidden save moderation and kindness.
Cults devoted to him are secret societies of indul­
gence, often using their debauchery to subjugate
others through blackmail, addiction, and manip­
ulation. They wear alabaster masks with ecstatic
expressions and ostentatious dress and body orna­
mentation to their secret assignations.
Although he prefers charm and subtle manipu­
lation, Graz’zt is capable of terrible violence when
provoked. He wields the greatsword Angdrelve, also
called Wave of Sorrow, whose wavy, razor-edged
blade drips acid at his command.
Graz’zt’s Lair
Graz’zt’s principal lair is his Argent Palace, a gran­
diose structure in the city of Zelatar, found within
his abyssal domain of Azzatar. Graz’zt’s demonic
influence radiates outward in a tangible ripple,
warping reality around him. Given enough time in a
single location, Graz’zt can twist it with his power.
Graz’zt’s lair is a den of ostentation and hedonism.
It is adorned with finery and decorations so deca­
dent that even the wealthiest of mortals would
blush at the excess. Within Graz’zt’s lairs, dev­
otees and subjects alike are forced to slake
Graz’zt’s thirst for pageantry.
--col--
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), Graz’zt
can take one of the following lair actions; he can’t
take the same lair action two rounds in a row:
Command. Graz’zt casts the command spell on
every creature of his choice in the lair. He needn't
see each one, but he must be aware that an in­
dividual is in the lair to target that creature. He
issues the same command to all the targets.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 147

=== PAGE 148 ===
^r«z'zt proved io be a plenii|ul Source o| magical
energy. He seems to thmk there's Somethin wore
between US- He'll eventually figure out the truth.
TASHA
Conjure Mirrors. Smooth surfaces within the lair
become as reflective as a polished mirror. Until
a different lair action is used, creatures within
the lair have disadvantage on Dexterity (Stealth)
checks made to hide.
Regional Effects
The region containing Graz’zt’s lair is warped by his
magic, creating one or more of the following effects:
Agitated Beasts. Wild beasts within 6 miles of the
lair break into frequent conflicts and coupling,
mirroring the behavior that occurs during their
mating seasons.
■ ■ ■ - -
Graz’zt
Large Fiend (Demon), Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 346 (33dlO+ 165)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
22 (+6) 15 (+2) 21 (+5) 23 (+6) 21 (+5) 26 (+8)
Saving Throws Dex +9, Con +12, Wis +12
Skills Deception +15, Insight+12, Perception +12,
Persuasion +15
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing that is nonmagical
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 22
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 24 (62,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Graz’zt fails a saving throw, he
can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Graz’zt has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. Graz’zt makes two Wave of Sorrow attacks. He
can replace one attack with a use of Spellcasting.
Wave of Sorrow (Creatsword). Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit,
reach 10 ft., one target. Hit: 20 (4d6 + 6) force damage plus 14
(4d6) acid damage.
lz|.8 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Beguiling Realm. Within 6 miles of the lair, all Wis­
dom (Insight) checks have disadvantage, and all
Charisma (Deception) and Charisma (Persuasion)
checks have advantage.
Mirrors Everywhere. Flat surfaces within 1 mile
of the lair that are made of stone or metal become
highly reflective, as though polished to a shine.
These surfaces become supernaturally mirrorlike.
If Graz’zt dies, these effects fade over the course of
Id 10 days.
Cultists of Graz’zt
Graz’zt grants his cultists special abilities. His cult­
ists can gain the Joy from Pain trait, while his cult
leaders can gain the Master of Pleasures trait.
Joy from Pain. Whenever this creature suffers a critical hit, it
can make one melee weapon attack as a reaction.
Master of Pleasures. As a reaction when this creature takes
damage, it can magically grant 5 temporary hit points to itself
and up to three allies within 30 feet of it.
Spellcasting. Craz’zt casts one of the following spells, requiring
no material components and using Charisma as the spellcast­
ing ability (spell save DC 23):
At will: charm person, detect magic, dispel magic
3/day each: darkness, dominate person, telekinesis, teleport
1/day each: dominate monster, greater invisibility
Teleport. Craz’zt teleports, along with any equipment he is
wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to an unoccupied space
he can see.
Bonus Actions
Change Shape. Graz’zt transforms into a form that resembles a
Medium Humanoid or back into his true form. Aside from his
size, his statistics are the same in each form. Any equipment
he is wearing or carrying isn’t transformed.
Reactions
Negate Spell (Recharge 5-6). Graz’zt tries to interrupt a spell
he sees a creature casting within 60 feet of him. If the spell is
3rd level or lower, the spell fails and has no effect. If the spell
is 4th level or higher, Graz’zt makes a Charisma check against
a DC of 10 + the spell’s level. On a success, the spell fails and
has no effect.
Legendary Actions
Graz’zt can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op­
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at
a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Graz’zt
regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn.
Abyssal Magic. Graz’zt uses Spellcasting or Teleport.
Attack. Graz’zt makes one Wave of Sorrow attack.
Dance, My Puppet! One creature charmed by Graz’zt that
Graz’zt can see must use its reaction to move up to its speed
as Graz’zt directs.

=== PAGE 149 ===
Grungs
Grungs are frog-like folk found in rain forests and
tropical jungles. These amphibians prefer shade
and live in trees, but they maintain hatcheries for
their offspring in well-guarded ground-level pools.
About three months after hatching, a grung tadpole
takes on the shape of an adult, and after another six
months, the grung reaches maturity.
Born in a wide range of colors, grungs most of­
ten appear in shades of green, blue, purple, red,
orange, and gold. All grungs secrete a substance
that is harmless to them but poisonous to other
creatures, and sometimes that substance has a spe­
cial effect based on the grung’s color (see “Variant:
Grung Poison”). They also use this venom to poison
their weapons.
Grung
The grung stat block represents a typical grung war­
rior or hunter, met either in a grung community or
traveling elsewhere as a mercenary, game warden,
guard, or bandit.
Grung Elite Warrior
A grung elite warrior typically leads a group of
grung and other warriors into battle and is often ac­
companied by a grung wildling.
Grung Wildling
Gifted with druidic magic, a grung wildling typ­
ically serves as an advisor, a healer, and a nur-
turer of crops.
--col--
Grung
Small Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 11 (2d6 + 4)
Speed 25 ft., climb 25 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
7 (-2) 14 (+2) 15 (+2) 10 (+0) 11 (+0) 10 (+0)
Saving Throws Dex +4
Skills Athletics +2, Perception +2, Stealth +4, Survival +2
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages Grung
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Amphibious. The grung can breathe air and water.
Poisonous Skin. Any creature that grapples the grung or oth­
erwise comes into direct contact with the grung's skin must
succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or become
poisoned for 1 minute. A poisoned creature no longer in direct
contact with the grung can repeat the saving throw at the end
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Standing Leap. The grung’s long jump is up to 25 feet and its
high jump is up to 15 feet, with or without a running start.
Water Dependency. If the grung isn’t immersed in water for
at least 1 hour during a day, it suffers 1 level of exhaustion at
the end of that day. The grung can recover from this exhaus­
tion only through magic or by immersing itself in water for at
least 1 hour.
Actions
Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft.
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1 d4 + 2) piercing damage
plus 5 (2d4) poison damage.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 149

=== PAGE 150 ===
Variant^Grung Poison
A creature poisoned by a grung can suffer an addi­
tional effect that depends on the grung’s color, as
described below. This effect lasts until the creature
is no longer poisoned by the grung.
Blue Crung. The poisoned creature must make a loud noise at
the start and end of its turn.
Cold Crung. The creature is charmed by the grung and can
speak Grung.
Grung Elite Warrior
Small Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 49 (9d6 + 18)
Speed 25 ft., climb 25 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
7 (-2) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 10 (+0) 11 (+0) 12 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +5
Skills Athletics +2, Perception +2, Stealth +5, Survival +2
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages Grung
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Amphibious. The grung can breathe air and water.
Poisonous Skin. Any creature that grapples the grung or oth­
erwise comes into direct contact with the grung’s skin must
succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or become
poisoned for 1 minute. A poisoned creature no longer in direct
contact with the grung can repeat the saving throw at the end
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Standing Leap. The grung’s long jump is up to 25 feet and its
high jump is up to 15 feet, with or without a running start.
Water Dependency. If the grung isn’t immersed in water for
at least 1 hour during a day, it suffers 1 level of exhaustion at
the end of that day. The grung can recover from this exhaus­
tion only through magic or by immersing itself in water for at
least 1 hour.
Actions
Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft.
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1 d4 + 3) piercing damage
plus 5 (2d4) poison damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 80/320 ft.,
one target. Hit: 6 (1 d6 + 3) piercing damage plus 5 (2d4) poi­
son damage.
Mesmerizing Chirr (Recharge 6). The grung makes a chirring
noise to which grungs are immune. Each Humanoid or Beast
that is within 15 feet of the grung and able to hear it must suc­
ceed on a DC 12 Wisdom saving throw or be stunned until the
end of the grung’s next turn.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Creen Crung. The poisoned creature can't move except to
climb or make standing jumps. If the creature is flying, it can’t
take any actions or reactions unless it lands.
Orange Crung. The poisoned creature is frightened of its allies.
Purple Crung. The poisoned creature feels a desperate need to
soak itself in liquid or mud. It can’t take actions or move except
to do so or to reach a body of liquid or mud.
Red Crung. The poisoned creature must use its action to eat if
food is within reach.
Grung Wildling
Small Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 27 (5d6 + 10)
Speed 25 ft., climb 25 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
7 (-2) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 10 (+0) 15 (+2) 11 (+0)
Saving Throws Dex +5
Skills Athletics +2, Perception +4, Stealth +5, Survival +4
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses passive Perception 14
Languages Grung
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Amphibious. The grung can breathe air and water.
Poisonous Skin. Any creature that grapples the grung or oth­
erwise comes into direct contact with the grung’s skin must
succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or become
poisoned for 1 minute. A poisoned creature no longer in direct
contact with the grung can repeat the saving throw at the end
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Standing Leap. The grung’s long jump is up to 25 feet and its
high jump is up to 15 feet, with or without a running start.
Water Dependency. If the grung isn’t immersed in water for
at least 1 hour during a day, it suffers 1 level of exhaustion at
the end of that day. The grung can recover from this exhaus­
tion only through magic or by immersing itself in water for at
least 1 hour.
Actions
Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft.
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1 d4 + 3) piercing damage
plus 5 (2d4) poison damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 80/320 ft.,
one target. Hit: 6 (1 d6 + 3) piercing damage plus 5 (2d4) poi­
son damage.
Spellcasting. The grung casts one of the following spells, using
Wisdom as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 12):
At will: druidcraft
3/day each: cure wounds, spike growth
2/day: plant growth

=== PAGE 151 ===
A guard drake is a reptilian creature created out of
dragon scales by means of a bizarre and grisly rit­
ual. When trained properly, a drake is obedient and
territorial, which makes it an excellent watch beast
that can follow simple commands.
Tiamat’s cult practices the ritual to create guard
drakes, as do other groups that are skilled in arcana
and associated with Dragons. The ritual requires
a chromatic dragon’s aid; the dragon typically
helps to reward its allies or worshipers with a valu­
able servant.
The ritual, which takes several days, requires
10 pounds of fresh dragon scales (donated by the
dragon allied with the group), a large amount of
fresh meat, and an iron cauldron. When the process
is complete, a Small egg emerges from the cauldron
and hatches within a few hours.
A newly hatched guard drake imprints upon the
first creature that feeds it (usually the one planning
to train it), establishing an aggressive but trusting
bond with that individual. A guard drake is fully
grown within two to three weeks and can be trained
in the same length of time. It is the equivalent of a
guard dog in terms of what it can be trained to do.
A guard drake resembles the type of dragon it was
created from, but with a wingless, squat, muscular
build. A drake can’t reproduce, nor can its scales be
used to make other guard drakes.
VARIANT: CHROMATIC DRAKES
Each type of chromatic dragon’s scales creates a
guard drake that resembles a wingless, stunted
version of that type of dragon, with unique abilities
related to that type. Each has the special features
described below.
--col--
Black Guard Drake. The drake can breathe air and water, has a
swimming speed of 30 feet, and has resistance to acid damage.
Blue Guard Drake. The drake has a burrowing speed of 20 feet
and resistance to lightning damage.
Green Guard Drake. The drake can breathe air and water,
has a swimming speed of 30 feet, and has resistance to poi­
son damage.
Red Guard Drake. The drake has climbing speed of 30 feet and
resistance to fire damage.
White Guard Drake. The drake has a burrowing speed
of 20 feet, a climbing speed of 30 feet, and resistance to
cold damage.
Guard Drake
Medium Dragon, Unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 52 (7d8 + 21)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 11 (+0) 16 (+3) 4 (-3) 10 (+0) 7 (-2)
Skills Perception +2
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages understands Draconic but can’t speak
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions
Multiattack. The guard drake makes one Bite attack and one
Tail attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (1 d8 + 3) piercing damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
6 (1 d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 151

=== PAGE 152 ===
Hellfire Engine
Hellfire engines are semiautonomous bringers
of destruction. Amnizus (in this book) and other
devilish generals hold them in reserve until they
are needed to repel an incursion by demons or
crusading mortals, but occasionally one of these
magical-mechanical hybrids gets loose, driven ber­
serk by its need to destroy.
Hellfire engines take many forms, but all of them
have one purpose: to mow down foes in waves. They
are incapable of subtlety or trickery, but their de­
structive capability is immense.
Mortal creatures slain by hellfire engines are
doomed to join the infernal legions in mere hours
unless powerful magic-wielders intervene on their
behalf. The archdukes of the Nine Hells would like
nothing better than to modify this magic so it works
against demons, too, but that discovery has eluded
them so far.
Hellfire Engine
Huge Construct, Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 216 (16dl2+ 112)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
20 (+5) 16 (+3) 24 (+7) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 1 (-5)
Saving Throws Dex +8, Wis +5, Cha +0
Damage Resistances cold, psychic; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, deafened, exhaustion,
frightened, paralyzed, poisoned, unconscious
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages understands Infernal but can’t speak
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Immutable Form. The hellfire engine is immune to any spell or
effect that would alter its form.
Magic Resistance. The hellfire engine has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Unusual Nature. The hellfire engine doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Flesh-Crushing Stride. The hellfire engine moves up to its
speed in a straight line. During this move, it can enter Large or
smaller creatures’ spaces. A creature whose space the hellfire
engine enters must make a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw. On a
successful save, the creature is pushed to the nearest space out
of the hellfire engine’s path. On a failed save, the creature falls
prone and takes 28 (8d6) bludgeoning damage.
If the hellfire engine remains in the prone creature’s space,
152 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
the creature is also restrained until it's no longer in the same
space as the hellfire engine. While restrained in this way, the
creature, or another creature within 5 feet of it, can make a DC
18 Strength check. On a success, the creature is shunted to an
unoccupied space of its choice within 5 feet of the hellfire en­
gine and is no longer restrained.
Hellfire Weapons. The hellfire engine uses one of the following
options (choose one or roll a d6):
1-2: Bonemelt Sprayer. The hellfire engine spews acidic flame
in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in the cone must make a DC
20 Dexterity saving throw, taking 11 (2dl0) fire damage plus
18 (4d8) acid damage on a failed save, or half as much dam­
age on a successful one. Creatures that fail the saving throw
are drenched in burning acid and take 5 (IdlO) fire damage
plus 9 (2d8) acid damage at the end of their turns. An af­
fected creature or another creature within 5 feet of it can take
an action to scrape off the burning fuel.
3-4: Lightning Flail. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 15
ft., one creature. Hit: 18 (3d8 + 5) bludgeoning damage plus
22 (5d8) lightning damage. Up to three other creatures of
the hellfire engine’s choice that it can see within 30 feet of
the target must each make a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw,
taking 22 (5d8) lightning damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one.
5-6: Thunder Cannon. The hellfire engine targets a point within
120 feet of it that it can see. Each creature within 30 feet of
that point must make a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw, tak­
ing 27 (5dl0) bludgeoning damage plus 19 (3dl2) thunder
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a suc­
cessful one.
If the chosen option kills a creature, the creature’s soul rises
from the River Styx as a lemure in Avernus in 1 d4 hours. If the
creature isn’t revived before then, only a wish spell or killing the
lemure and casting true resurrection on the creature’s original
body can restore it to life. Constructs and devils are immune to
this effect.

=== PAGE 153 ===
Hobgoblin Devastator
Hobgoblins with a prodigious talent for magic
sometimes undergo grueling training to become
hobgoblin devastators. Devastators are spellcasters
who call down fireballs and other destructive magic
in the defense of the court they serve, whether that
court is in the Feywild or the Material Plane. A hob­
goblin devastator on the battlefield is a boon to their
allies and a threat to every foe around them.
Far from being cloistered academics, hobgoblin
devastators are masters of the battlefield. In addi­
tion to tactical applications of the magical arts, they
learn the basics of weapon use, and they measure
their deeds by the enemies defeated though their
magic. They have the respect of other members of
the host and receive obedience and deference from
many quarters.
In the Feywild, many archfey seek to bolster
their armies’ might with the services of hobgoblin
devastators.
--col--
COBLINOIDS OF THE FEYWILD
The goblinoid peoples—goblins, hobgoblins, and
bugbears—first appeared in the Feywild millennia ago,
and they resided there until the god Maglubiyet con­
quered them. They then spread throughout the multi­
verse, with many of them ending up on the worlds of
the Material Plane. Most goblinoids encountered on
those worlds are members of families that have been
away from the Feywild for centuries, and over time,
those lineages have become Humanoid. Fey gobli­
noids, who still bear the magic of the Feywild, are rare
on the Material Plane but not unheard of. Hobgoblin
devastators are examples of such Fey folk, as are hob­
goblin iron shadows and nilbogs (also in this book).
I-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
