..
Baphomet
Huge Fiend (Demon), Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 22 (natural armor)
Hit Points 319 (22dl2+ 176)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
30 (+10) 14 (+2) 26 (+8) 18 (+4) 24 (+7) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +9, Con +15, Wis +14
Skills Intimidation +17, Perception +14
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing that is nonmagical
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 24
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 23 (50,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
Labyrinthine Recall. Baphomet can perfectly recall any path he
has traveled, and he is immune to the maze spell.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Baphomet fails a saving throw,
he can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Baphomet has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. Baphomet makes one Bite attack, one Gore
attack, and one Heartcleaver attack. He also uses Fright­
ful Presence.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 19 (2d8 + 10) piercing damage.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Cultists of Baphomet
Baphomet grants his cultists special abilities. All his
devotees gain the Labyrinthine Recall trait below.
He grants his rank-and-file followers the Unerring
Tracker trait, and cult leaders gain the Incite the
Hunters trait.
Labyrinthine Recall. This creature can perfectly recall any path
it has traveled.
Unerring Tracker. As a bonus action, this creature magically
creates a psychic link with one creature it can see. For the
next hour, as a bonus action this creature learns the current
n­ distance and direction to the target if it is on the same plane of
existence. The link ends if this creature is incapacitated or if it
uses this ability on a different target.
Incite the Hunters (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). As an
action, this creature allows each ally within 30 feet of it that has
the Unerring Tracker trait to make one weapon attack as a reac­
tion against the target of that ally’s Unerring Tracker.
Core. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2d6 + 10) piercing damage. If Baphomet moved at
least 10 feet straight toward the target immediately before the
hit, the target takes an extra 16 (3dl 0) piercing damage. If the
target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 25 Strength sav­
ing throw or be pushed up to 10 feet away and knocked prone.
Heartcleaver. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
target. Hit: 21 (2dl0 + 10) force damage.
Frightful Presence. Each creature of Baphomet’s choice within
120 feet of him and aware of him must succeed on a DC 18
Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 minute. A
frightened creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. These
later saves have disadvantage if Baphomet is within line of
sight of the creature.
If a creature succeeds on any of these saves or the effect ends
on it, the creature is immune to Baphomet’s Frightful Presence
for the next 24 hours.
Spellcasting. Baphomet casts one of the following spells, re
quiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 18):
3/day each: dispel magic, dominate beast, maze, wall of stone
,
1/day: teleport
Legendary Actions
Baphomet can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op­
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a
time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Baphomet
regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn.
Heartcleaver Attack. Baphomet makes one Heartcleaver attack.
Charge (Costs 2 Actions). Baphomet moves up to his speed
without provoking opportunity attacks, then makes a
Gore attack.

=== PAGE 59 ===
Saving Throws Dex +4, Wis +3
Skills Acrobatics +4, Perception +5, Performance +6
Senses passive Perception 15
Languages any two languages
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions
Multiattack. The bard makes two Shortsword or Shortbow at­
tacks. It can replace one attack with a use of Spellcasting.
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) piercing damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 80/320 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) piercing damage.
Cacophony (Recharge 4-6). Each creature in a 15-foot cube
originating from the bard must make a DC 12 Constitution
saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 9 (2d8) thunder
damage and is pushed up to 10 feet away from the bard. On
a successful save, a creature takes half as much damage and
isn’t pushed.
Spellcasting. The bard casts one of the following spells, using
Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 12):
At will: dancing lights, mage hand, prestidigitation
1/day each: charm person, invisibility, sleep
Bonus Actions
Taunt (2/Day). The bard targets one creature within 30 feet of
it. If the target can hear the bard, the target must succeed on a
DC 12 Charisma saving throw or have disadvantage on ability
checks, attack rolls, and saving throws until the start of the
bard’s next turn.
--col--
B
ard
Bards are gifted poets, storytellers, and entertain­
ers who travel far and wide. They’re commonly
found in taverns or in the company of jolly bands of
adventurers, rough-and-tumble mercenaries, and
wealthy patrons.
Each bard is a master of at least one type of per­
formance. You may choose a bard’s main type, or
you may roll on the Bard Performance Types table
to determine it.
Bard Performance Types
diO Performance Type
1 Poetry
2 Singing
3 Bagpipe
4 Flute
5 Dancing
6 Drum
7 Lute
8 Puppetry
9 Mime
10 Acting
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 59

=== PAGE 60 ===
Barghest
Long ago, the god Maglubiyet—conqueror and then
lord of early goblinoids—bargained with the Genera
of Gehenna for aid. The General provided yugoloths
which then died in service to Maglubiyet. Yet when
the time came to honor his part of the compact,
Maglubiyet reneged on the deal. In vengeance, the
General of Gehenna created the soul-devouring bar
ghests to devour goblinoid souls.
The mission of every barghest, implanted in it by
the General of Gehenna, is to consume souls. It eat
these souls by devouring the bodies of those it kills,
preferring goblinoids.
Barghest
Large Fiend, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 60 (8dl0 + 16)
Speed 60 ft. (30 ft. in goblin form)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 15 (+2) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 12 (+1) 14 (+2)
Skills Deception +4, Intimidation +4, Perception +5, Stealth +4
Damage Resistances cold, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities acid, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 1
Languages Abyssal, Common, Goblin, Infernal, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Fire Banishment. When the barghest starts its turn engulfed
in flames that are at least 10 feet high or wide, it must succeed
on a DC 15 Charisma saving throw or be instantly banished
to Gehenna.
Soul Feeding. The barghest can feed on the corpse of a Fey or
Humanoid it killed within the past 10 minutes. This feeding
takes at least 1 minute, and it destroys the corpse. The victim’s
soul is trapped in the barghest for 24 hours, after which time it
-....... ...........
6o CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
plete its mission, return to Gehenna, and serve
the General directly in his yugoloth legions, but it
n doesn’t kill goblinoids indiscriminately. By devour­
al ing the souls of goblinoid leaders and other pow­
s, erful individuals, a barghest earns elevated status
in the afterlife. Barghests typically keep their true
nature secret, preying on the occasional lone goblin
when the opportunity arises, until they reach adult­
r- hood and are capable of seeking out stronger prey.
A barghest avoids contact with large, open fires.
Any conflagration larger than its body acts as a gate­
ts way to Gehenna and banishes it to that plane, where
, it is likely to be slain or enslaved by a yugoloth for
its failure.
is digested and the person is incapable of being revived. If the
barghest dies before the soul is digested, the soul is released.
While a soul is trapped in the barghest, any magic that tries to
restore the soul to life has a 50 percent chance of failing and
being wasted.
Actions
Multiattack. The barghest makes one Bite attack and one
Claw attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
4
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (1 d8 + 4) slashing damage.
Spellcasting. The barghest casts one of the following spells,
15
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
.
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 12):
At will: levitate, minor illusion, pass without trace
1/day each: charm person, dimension door, suggestion
d
Bonus Actions
Change Shape. The barghest transforms into a Small goblin or
back into its true form. Other than its size and speed, its sta­
tistics are the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing
or carrying isn’t transformed. The barghest reverts to its true
s
form if it dies.
t

=== PAGE 61 ===
Berbalang
Berbalangs creep across the petrified remains of
dead gods adrift on the Astral Plane. Obsessed with
gathering secrets, both from the gods they inhabit
and from the bones of dead creatures, they call forth
the spirits of the dead and force them to divulge
what they learned in life.
Berbalangs prefer to speak only to dead things,
and specifically only to the spirits they call forth in
the hope of learning secrets. They record their sto­
ries on the bones that once belonged to these crea­
tures, thus preserving the information they gain.
Pursuit of knowledge drives everything berbal­
angs do. Although they mostly learn their secrets
from the dead, they aren’t above spying on the living
to take knowledge from them as well. A berbalang
can create a spectral duplicate of itself and send
the duplicate out to gather information on other
planes by watching places where the gods and their
servants gather. When a berbalang is perceiving its
environment through its duplicate, its actual body is
unconscious and can’t protect itself. Thus, a berbal­
ang typically uses its duplicate for only a short time
before returning its consciousness to its body.
The knowledge that berbalangs accumulate
makes them great sources of information for pow­
erful people traveling the planes. Berbalangs ignore
petitioners, however, unless they come bearing a
choice secret or the bones of a particularly inter­
esting creature. Some githyanki have been able to
strike deals with the creatures, using berbalangs to
spy on their enemies and to watch over their creches
on the Material Plane.
Berbalang
Medium Aberration, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 49 (14d8 - 14)
Speed 30 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
9 (-1) 16 (+3) 9 (-1) 17 (+3) 11 (+0) 10 (+0)
Saving Throws Dex +5, I nt +5
Skills Arcana +5, History +5, Insight +2, Perception +2,
Religion +5
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages all
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions
Multiattack. The berbalang makes one Bite attack and one
Claw attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (IdlO + 3) piercing damage plus 4 (1 d8) psychic damage.
1 . 1 1 . 1
--col--
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) slashing damage.
Spellcasting. The berbalang casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Intelligence as the
spellcasting ability:
At will: speak with dead
1/day: plane shift (self only)
Bonus Actions
Spectral Duplicate (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The
berbalang creates one spectral duplicate of itself in an unoc­
cupied space it can see within 60 feet of it. While the duplicate
exists, the berbalang is unconscious. A berbalang can have only
one duplicate at a time. The duplicate disappears when it or
the berbalang drops to 0 hit points or when the berbalang dis­
misses it (no action required).
The duplicate has the same statistics and knowledge as
the berbalang, and everything experienced by the duplicate is
known by the berbalang. All damage dealt by the duplicate's
attacks is psychic damage.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 6l

=== PAGE 62 ===
Bheur Hag
Bheur hags live in wintry lands, favoring snowy
mountains. These hags become more active during
winter, using their ice and weather magic to make
life miserable for nearby settlements.
A bheur hag’s skin has the bluish hue of a person
who has frozen to death. The hag’s hair is white,
and the hag is emaciated, with pale eyes surrounde
by bruise-colored flesh. A bheur hag carries a
twisted gray wooden staff that can be ridden like a
flying broom and that augments the hag’s magic.
Bheur hags are attracted to selfish actions in­
spired by deadly cold, such as murdering a traveler
for a winter coat or chopping down a dryad’s grove
for firewood. These actions are especially sweet to
a bheur if they are unwarranted, such as a greedy
merchant hoarding excess food for the winter while
others starve. Bheurs use their ability to manipulate
weather to batter villages with freezing cold, hoping
to instill a despair that turns folk against each other
In combat, a bheur hag also strives to inspire
horror. When near a recently slain foe, the hag may
forgo an attack to feed on the corpse. The sight of
this butchery is enough to terrify most witnesses.
Hag Covens
A bheur hag that is part of a coven (see the “Hag
Covens” sidebar in the Monster Manual) has a chal­
lenge rating of 9 (5,000 XP).
62 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Bheur Hag
Medium Fey, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 91 (14d8 + 28)
Speed 30 ft., fly 50 ft. (hover, Graystaff Magic)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
13 (+1) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 13 (+1) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Wis +4
Skills Nature +4, Perception +4, Stealth +6, Survival +4
Damage Immunities cold
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Auran, Common, Giant
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Control Weather (1/Day). The hag can cast the control weather
spell, requiring no material components and using Charisma as
the spellcasting ability.
Craystaff Magic. The hag carries a graystaff, a magic staff. The
hag can use its flying speed only while astride the staff. If the
staff is lost or destroyed, the hag must craft another, which
takes a year and a day. Only a bheur hag can use a graystaff
Ice Walk. The hag can move across and climb icy surfaces with­
g out needing to make an ability check, and difficult terrain com­
posed of ice or snow doesn't cost the hag extra moment.
Actions
Multiattack. The hag makes two Slam or Frost Shard attacks.
ed Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 10 (2d8 + 1) bludgeoning damage plus 18 (4d8)
cold damage.
Frost Shard. Ranged Spell Attack: +6 to hit, range 60 ft., one
target. Hit: 30 (6d8 + 3) cold damage, and the target’s speed is
reduced by 10 feet until the start of the hag’s next turn.
Horrific Feast. The hag feeds on the corpse of one enemy
within reach that died within the past minute. Each creature
of the hag’s choice that is within 60 feet and able to see the
feeding must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be
e
frightened of the hag for 1 minute. While frightened in this way,
e a creature is incapacitated, can’t understand what others say,
g can’t read, and speaks only in gibberish. A creature can repeat
r. the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the
effect on itself on a success. If a creature’s saving throw is suc­
cessful or the effect ends for it, the creature is immune to the
y
hag’s Horrific Feast for the next 24 hours.
Spellcasting. While holding or riding the graystaff, the hag
casts one of the following spells, requiring no material com­
ponents and using Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell
save DC 14):
At will: hold person
l­
1/day each: cone of cold, ice storm, wall of ice

=== PAGE 63 ===
Blackguard
Medium Humanoid (Paladin), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 18 (plate)
Hit Points 119 (14d8 + 56)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 11 (+0) 18 (+4) 11 (+0) 14 (+2) 15 (+2)
Saving Throws Wis +5, Cha +5
Skills Athletics +7, Deception +5, Intimidation +5
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Actions
Multiattack. The blackguard makes three attacks, using Glaive,
Shortbow, or both.
Claive. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 9 (IdlO + 4) slashing damage plus 9 (2d8) ne­
crotic damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 80/320 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) piercing damage.
Dreadful Aspect (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). Each
enemy within 30 feet of the blackguard must succeed on a DC
13 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened of the blackguard
for 1 minute. If a frightened target ends its turn more than 30
feet away from the blackguard, the target can repeat the saving
throw, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Spellcasting. The blackguard casts one of the following spells,
using Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 13):
2/day each: command, dispel magic, f nd steed
Bonus Actions
Smite. Immediately after the blackguard hits a target with an
attack roll, the blackguard can force that target to make a DC 13
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the target suffers
one of the following effects of the blackguard's choice:
Blind. The target is blinded for 1 minute. The blinded target
can repeat the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the
effect on itself on a success.
Shove. The target is pushed up to 10 feet away and
knocked prone.
--col--
Blackguard
Blackguards are paladins who broke their sacred
oaths and now indulge their own villainous ambi­
tions. They consort with Fiends and Undead, and
they reject many of the goodly things from their
former lives.
Blackguards often adorn their armor and weapons
with dread accoutrements or are marked by eerie
phenomena. You may choose a blackguard’s accou­
trement or roll on the Blackguard Accoutrements
table to determine it.
Blackguard Accoutrements
d8 Accoutrement
1 Armor etched with stylized depictions of grue­
some battles
2 Helm wrought in the shape of a demonic boar
3 Helm wrought to resemble a death mask
4 Cloak decorated with bloody handprints
5 Curls of inky smoke seeping from armor at the
joints
6 Dozens of flies buzzing about the blackguard
7 Severed hand hanging from a chain around the
blackguard’s neck
8 Glaive adorned with a length of cloth bearing
the words “I choose violence”
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 63

=== PAGE 64 ===
Bodak
A bodak is the undying remains of someone who
revered Orcus (appears in this book). Devoid of life
and soul, it exists only to cause death.
A worshiper of Orcus can take ritual vows while
carving the demon lord’s symbol on their chest
over the heart. Orcus’s power flays body, mind, and
soul, leaving behind a sentient husk that consumes
life energy near it. Most bodaks come into being in
this way, then are unleashed to spread death in Or
cus’s name.
Bodaks are extensions of Orcus’s will outside the
Abyss, serving the demon prince’s aims and other
minions. Orcus can recall anything a bodak sees o
hears. If he so chooses, he can speak through a bo
dak to address his enemies and followers directly.
A bodak retains vague impressions of its past life
It seeks out its former allies and enemies alike to
destroy them, as its warped soul seeks to erase any
thing connected to its former life. Minions of Orcus
are the one exception to this compulsion; a bodak
recognizes them as kindred souls and spares them
from its wrath. Anyone who knew the individual
before its transformation into a bodak can recog­
nize mannerisms or other subtle clues to its origi­
nal identity.
64 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Bodak
Medium Undead, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 58 (9d8 + 18)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15(+2) 16(4-3) 15 (+2) 7 (-2) 12(4-1) 12 (+1)
Skills Perception 4-4, Stealth 4-6
Damage Resistances cold, fire; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Abyssal, the languages it knew in life
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) Proficiency Bonus 4-3
Death Gaze. When a creature that can see the bodak’s eyes
starts its turn within 30 feet of the bodak, the bodak can force
it to make a DC 13 Constitution saving throw if the bodak isn’t
incapacitated and can see the creature. If the saving throw fails
by 5 or more, the creature is reduced to 0 hit points unless it
is immune to the frightened condition. Otherwise, a creature
takes 16 (3dl0) psychic damage on a failed save.
