Creatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
target. Hit: 24 (4d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one
target. Hit: 22 (3dl 0 + 6) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 17 Strength saving throw or
be knocked prone.
Petrifying Touch. The giant touches one Medium or smaller
creature within 10 feet of it that is charmed by it. The target
must make a DC 17 Constitution saving throw. On a failed
save, the target becomes petrified, and the giant can adhere
the target to its stony body. Greater restoration spells and other
magic that can undo petrification have no effect on a petrified
creature adhered to the giant unless the giant is dead, in which
case the magic works normally, freeing the petrified creature as
well as ending the petrified condition on it.

=== PAGE 235 ===
Storm Giant Quintessent
Huge Ciant, Typically Chaotic Good
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 230 (20dl2 + 100)
Speed 50 ft., fly 50 ft. (hover), swim 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
29 (+9) 14 (+2) 20 (+5) 17 (+3) 20 (+5) 19 (+4)
Saving Throws Str +14, Con +10, Wis +10, Cha +9
Skills Arcana +8, History +8, Perception +10
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities lightning, thunder
Senses truesight 60 ft., passive Perception 20
Languages Common, Giant
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Amphibious. The giant can breathe air and water.
Legendary Resistance (1/Day). If the giant fails a saving throw,
it can choose to succeed instead.
Actions
Multiattack. The giant makes two Lightning Sword attacks, or
it uses Wind Javelin twice.
Lightning Sword. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 15 ft.,
one target. Hit: 40 (9d6 + 9) lightning damage.
Wind Javelin. The giant coalesces wind into a javelin-like form
and hurls it at a creature it can see within 600 feet of it. The
javelin deals 19 (3d6 + 9) force damage to the target, striking
unerringly. The javelin disappears after it hits.
Legendary Actions
The giant can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op­
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at
a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The giant
regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Gust. The giant targets a creature it can see within 60 feet of
it and creates a magical gust of wind around the target, who
must succeed on a DC 18 Strength saving throw or be moved
up to 20 feet in any horizontal direction the giant chooses.
Thunderbolt (Costs 2 Actions). The giant hurls a thunderbolt
at a creature it can see within 600 feet of it. The target must
make a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw, taking 22 (4dl0) thun­
der damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
One with the Storm (Costs 3 Actions). The giant vanishes, dis­
persing itself into the storm surrounding its lair. The giant
can end this effect at the start of any of its turns, becoming
a giant once more and appearing in any location it chooses
within its lair. While dispersed, the giant can't take any ac­
tions other than lair actions, and it can’t be targeted by at­
tacks, spells, or other effects. The giant can’t use this ability
outside its lair, nor can it use this ability if another creature
is using a control weather spell or similar magic to quell
the storm.
......... ■ ।
--col--
Storm Giant Quintessent
To forestall the inevitable, some storm giants ap­
proaching the end of their natural life spans seek an
escape from death. They plumb the depths of their
powerful connection to the elements and disperse
themselves into nature, transforming into semicon­
scious storms. The blizzard that rages unendingly
around a mountain peak, the vortex that swirls
around a remote island, or the thunderstorm that
howls ceaselessly up and down a rugged coastline
could, in fact, be the undying form of a storm giant
clinging to existence.
A storm giant quintessent sheds their armor and
weapons but gains the power to form makeshift
weapons out of thin air. When the giant has no fur­
ther use of these elemental weapons, or when the
giant dies, the weapons disappear.
A storm giant quintessent can revert to their true
giant form temporarily and can maintain that form
long enough for the giant to communicate with a
mortal, carry out a short task, or defend their home
against aggressors.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 235

=== PAGE 236 ===
A Quintessent's Lair
A storm giant quintessent has no need for castles
or dungeon lairs. Their lair is usually a secluded
region or prominent geographic feature, such as a
mountain peak, a great waterfall, a remote island, a
fog-shrouded loch, a beautiful coral reef, or a wind­
swept desert bluff. The storm in which the giant
lives could be a blizzard, a typhoon, a thunderstorm,
or a sandstorm, as befits the environment.
Lair Actions
A storm giant quintessent can use lair actions in gi­
ant form and while transformed into a storm. On ini­
tiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the giant can
take one of the following lair actions; the giant can’t
take the same lair action two rounds in a row:
Deafening Boom. The giant creates a thunderclap
centered on a point anywhere in their lair. Each
creature within 20 feet of that point must succeed
on a DC 18 Constitution saving throw or be deaf­
ened until the end of its next turn.
Fog. The giant creates a 20-foot-radius sphere of
fog (or murky water if within water) centered on
a point anywhere in its lair. The sphere spreads
around corners, and its area is heavily obscured.
The fog lasts until the giant disperses it (no action
required), and it can’t be dispersed by wind.
236 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Gale. The giant creates a 60-foot-long, 10-foot-wide
line of strong wind (or strong current within wa­
ter) originating from a point anywhere in its lair.
Each creature in that line must succeed on a DC
18 Strength saving throw or be pushed 15 feet in
the direction the wind is blowing. The gust dis­
perses gas or vapor, and it extinguishes candles,
torches, and similar unprotected flames in its
area. Protected flames, such as those of lanterns,
have a 50 percent chance of being extinguished.
Regional Effects
The region containing a storm giant quintessent’s
lair is warped by the giant’s presence, which creates
one or more of the following effects:
Downpour. Rain, snow, or blowing dust or sand
(whichever is most appropriate) is constant within
1 mile of the lair. Rain causes rivers and streams
to fill or overflow their banks; snow, dust, or sand
forms deep drifts or dunes.
Lightning. Flashes of lightning and peals of thun­
der are continual, day and night, within 5 miles
of the lair.
Winds. High wind blows within 1 mile of the lair,
making it impossible to light a fire unless the loca­
tion where the fire is lit is protected from the wind.
If the giant dies, the lightning, thunder, and high
wind regional effects end immediately. Rain, snow,
and blowing dust abate gradually within ld8 days.

=== PAGE 237 ===
Swarm of Rot Grubs
Rot grubs are finger-sized maggots that eat living
and dead creatures, although they can survive on
vegetation. They infest corpses and piles of decay­
ing matter and attack anyone that disturbs them. Af­
ter burrowing into a creature, rot grubs instinctively
chew their way toward vital parts.
Rot grubs recoil from flames, and fire is the main
weapon against rot grubs once they’re inside a body.
Magic that neutralizes poison can also stop them
before they kill their host.
Single Rot Grub
XILEF
NOSAJ
Rot grubs pose a threat both singly and as a swarm.
See the stat block for the mechanics of a swarm of
rot grubs. A single rot grub has no stat block.
Any creature that comes into contact with a single
rot grub must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution sav­
ing throw or be poisoned, as the rot grub burrows
into the creature. The poisoned creature takes 3
(ld6) poison damage at the end of each of its turns.
Whenever the poisoned creature takes fire damage,
the creature can repeat the saving throw, ending the
effect on itself on a success. If the poisoned creature
ends its turn with 0 hit points, it dies, as the rot
grub kills it.
--col--
Armor Class 8
Hit Points 22 (5d8)
Speed 5 ft., climb 5 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
2 (-4) 7 (-2) 10 (+0) 1 (-5) 2 (-4) 1 (-5)
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Resistances piercing, slashing
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, grappled,
paralyzed, petrified, prone, restrained
Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 6
Languages —
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature’s space and
vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large
enough for a Tiny maggot. The swarm can’t regain hit points or
gain temporary hit points.
Actions
Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 0 ft., one creature
in the swarm’s space. Hit: 7 (2d6) piercing damage, and the
target must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or
be poisoned. At the end of each of the poisoned target's turns,
the target takes 3 (1 d6) poison damage. Whenever the poi­
soned target takes fire damage, the target can repeat the saving
throw, ending the effect on itself on a success. If the poisoned
target ends its turn with 0 hit points, it dies.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 237

=== PAGE 238 ===
Armor Class 17 (leather armor, Suave Defense)
Hit Points 66 (12d8 + 12)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
12 (+1) 18 (+4) 12 (+1) 14 (+2) 11 (+0) 15 (+2)
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +5, Persuasion +6
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Suave Defense. While the swashbuckler is wearing light or
no armor and wielding no shield, its AC includes its Cha­
risma modifier.
Actions________________________________ _
Multiattack. The swashbuckler makes one Dagger attack and
two Rapier attacks.
Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1 d4 + 4) piercing damage.
Rapier. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (1 d8 + 4) piercing damage.
Bonus Actions
Lightfooted. The swashbuckler takes the Dash or Disen­
gage action.
238 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Swashbuckler
Swashbucklers are charming ne’er-do-wells who
live by their own codes of honor. They crave noto­
riety, often indulge in romantic trysts, and eke out
livings as pirates and corsairs, rarely staying in one
place for too long.
Many swashbucklers have a signature flourish
with which they embellish their actions to make
themselves more memorable. You can roll on the
Swashbuckler Flourishes table or choose one of
the options to find a suitably dramatic flourish for a
swashbuckler.
Swashbuckler Flourishes
_
d8 Flourish
1 Winks and flashes a charming grin
2 Bows theatrically
3 Constantly flips their dagger
4 Punctuates sentences with a boisterous “Ha-HA!”
5 Sings catchy sea chanteys
6 Dexterously manipulates a silver coin through their
fingers
7 Hurls colorful insults
8 Adds showy embellishments to rapier strokes

=== PAGE 239 ===
Sword Wraiths
When glory-obsessed warriors die in battle without
honor, they might haunt the site as sword wraiths.
Sword Wraith Commander
Sword wraith commanders haunt battlefields, at­
tacking anyone who questions their valor but look­
ing kindly on those who sing their praises.
Sword Wraith Warrior
Sword wraith warriors are most often found on
ancient battlefields where soldiers were hemmed in
and slaughtered without quarter.
1 - ------------ • ............-
Sword Wraith Commander
Medium Undead, Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 18 (breastplate, shield)
Hit Points 127 (15d8 + 60)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 14 (+2) 18 (+4) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 14 (+2)
Skills Perception +4
Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, frightened, poisoned,
unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Turning Defiance. The commander and any other sword wraiths
within 30 feet of it have advantage on saving throws against
effects that turn Undead.
Unusual Nature. The commander doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The commander makes two Longsword or Long­
bow attacks.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 8 (1 d8 + 4) slashing damage, or 9 (IdlO + 4) slashing
damage if used with two hands.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 150/600 ft.,
one target. Hit: 6 (1 d8 + 2) piercing damage.
Call to Honor (1/Day). If the commander has taken damage
during this combat, it gives itself advantage on attack rolls until
the end of its next turn, and ld4 + 1 sword wraith warriors ap­
pear in unoccupied spaces within 30 feet of it. The warriors last
until they drop to 0 hit points, and they take their turns imme­
diately after the commander’s turn on the same initiative count.
Bonus Actions
Martial Fury. The commander makes one Longsword or Long­
bow attack, which deals an extra 9 (2d8) necrotic damage on a
hit, and attack rolls against it have advantage until the start of
its next turn.
--col--
Sword Wraith Warrior
Medium Undead, Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 16 (chain shirt, shield)
Hit Points 45 (6d8 + 18)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 12 (+1) 17 (+3) 6 (-2) 9 (-1) 10 (+0)
Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, frightened, poisoned,
unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages the languages it knew in life
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Unusual Nature. The warrior doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Battleaxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 8 (1 d8 + 4) slashing damage, or 9 (IdlO + 4) slashing
damage if used with two hands.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 150/600 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5 (1 d8 + 1) piercing damage.
Bonus Actions
Martial Fury. The warrior makes one Battleaxe or Longbow
attack, and attack rolls against it have advantage until the start
of its next turn.
...... : ---------- . -'"Z"- 1 'i
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 239

=== PAGE 240 ===
I believe Spile can be an excellent motiva
M unchecked Jury? That rarely leads to
anything more than a bi*j mess-
* TAS
Tanarukk
Medium Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 95 (10d8 + 50)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 13 (+1) 20 (+5) 9 (-1) 9(-l) 9 (-1)
Skills Intimidation +2, Perception +2
Damage Resistances fire, poison
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Abyssal, Common, plus any one language
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Magic Resistance. The tanarukk has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The tanarukk makes one Bite attack and one
Greatsword attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit:
8 (1 d8 + 4) piercing damage.
Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
Bonus Actions
Aggressive. The tanarukk moves up to its speed toward an en­
emy that it can see.
Reactions
Unbridled Fury. In response to being hit by a melee attack, the
tanarukk can make one Bite or Greatsword attack with advan­
tage against the attacker.
240 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
ator.
o
SHA
Tanarukk
When demonic influence corrupts the leadership
of a people or an organization, the leaders might
embrace abyssal magic to make tanarukks, using
these ferocious warriors to bolster their follow­
ers’ strength.
The demon lord Baphomet (appears in this book)
gladly shares the secret of creating tanarukks
with those who entreat him for power; the cult of
Gruumsh has also mastered a ritual for this pur­
pose, and bestows it on those deemed worthy. What­
ever process is used corrupts the subject, transform­
ing them into a vicious Fiend.
Although tanarukks are valued as fearsome fight­
ers, they are a threat to their allies off the battlefield.
When not in combat, a tanarukk is destructive and
volatile and is usually kept imprisoned by its allies.
If unrestrained, a free tanarukk embarks on a ram­
page, attempting to take over by force. Most such
coups fail but are costly nonetheless. If a tanarukk
does seize the leadership of a group, reckless raid­
ing or even war is the course they inevitably choose.

=== PAGE 241 ===
Titivilus
Dispater, the gloomy Lord of Dis, rules from his iron
palace, seeming to hide behind its labyrinthine cor­
ridors, iron walls, diabolical traps, and monstrous
servants. Knowing he has enemies on all sides and
fearing he’ll be displaced like Moloch, Geryon, and
so many others, he almost never travels farther than
the sprawling city that lies outside his palace.
Dispater is correct to fear, but the true threat
comes not from without. The lord’s great error was
allowing himself to be seduced by Titivilus, who
beguiled his way into being the primary advisor in
Dispater’s household.
Although Titivilus is inferior in physical strength
and power when compared to other archdevils, he
compensates with cunning. A shrewd politician, he
has clawed his way up through the ranks to become
the second-most powerful devil in Dis, entirely by
saying the right thing at the right time to get what
he wanted. Charming and pleasant, he is a master
at negotiation, able to twist words so as to leave his
victims confused and believing he’s on their side.
Through these skills, Titivilus has manipulated ev­
eryone along his path to power, either to win them
over to his cause or to remove them as a threat.
--col--
Since gaining his position, Titivilus has convinced
Dispater that countless plots are being hatched
against him and that Asmodeus himself seeks to
remove Dispater from power. In response, Dispater
has withdrawn to his palace and left day-to-day de­
cisions to Titivilus, even authorizing him to answer
and negotiate bargains with mortals who attempt
to summon Dispater. Titivilus now represents his
master and speaks with his voice, a turn of events
that leads some to whisper that either Titivilus is
Dispater in disguise or Titivilus has removed the
archduke and replaced him altogether.
Titivilus recognizes the precariousness of his po­
sition. After all, Dispater’s acceptance of his plans
and his advice can last only so long before some
other plotter steps in and reveals the truth. For
insurance, Titivilus has begun recruiting outsiders
to deal with problem devils, to insulate him against
criticism, and, above all, to create complications that
he can solve so as to reinforce his value in the eyes
of his master. Titivilus finds adventurers well suited
to the tasks he needs performed and recruits them
directly or through intermediaries, expending them
later as his plans require.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
241

=== PAGE 242 ===
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 150 (20d8 + 60)
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 22 (+6) 17 (+3) 24 (+7) 22 (+6) 26 (+8)
Saving Throws Dex +11, Con +8, Wis +11, Cha +13
Skills Deception +13, Insight +11, Intimidation +13,
Persuasion +13
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Titivilus fails a saving throw,
he can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Titivilus has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Regeneration. Titivilus regains 10 hit points at the start of his
turn. If he takes cold or radiant damage, this trait doesn’t func­
tion at the start of his next turn. Titivilus dies only if he starts
his turn with 0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate.
Ventriloquism. Whenever Titivilus speaks, he can choose a
point within 60 feet of him; his voice emanates from that point.
Actions
Multiattack. Titivilus makes one Silver Sword attack, and he
uses Frightful Word.
Silver Sword. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 8 (ld8 + 4) force damage, or 9 (IdlO + 4) force
damage if used with two hands, plus 16 (3dl 0) necrotic dam­
age. If the target is a creature, its hit point maximum is reduced
by an amount equal to half the necrotic damage taken.
242 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Frightful Word. Titivilus targets one creature he can see within
10 feet of him. The target must succeed on a DC 21 Wisdom
saving throw or become frightened of him for 1 minute. While
frightened in this way, the target must take the Dash action and
move away from Titivilus by the safest available route on each
of its turns, unless there is nowhere to move, in which case it
