needn’t take the Dash action. The target can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself
on a success.
Spellcasting. Titivilus casts one of the following spells, requir­
ing no material components and using Charisma as the spell­
casting ability (spell save DC 21):
At will: alter self, major image, nondetection, sending, suggestion
3/day each: mislead, modify memory
Teleport. Titivilus teleports, along with any equipment he is
wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to an unoccupied space
he can see.
Twisting Words. Titivilus targets one creature he can see within
60 feet of him. The target must succeed on a DC 21 Charisma
saving throw or become charmed by Titivilus for 1 minute. The
charmed target can repeat the saving throw if Titivilus deals
any damage to it. A creature that succeeds on the saving throw
is immune to Titivilus’s Twisting Words for 24 hours.
Legendary Actions
Titivilus can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op­
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at
a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Titivilus
regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn.
Corrupting Guidance. Titivilus uses Twisting Words. Alterna­
tively, he targets one creature charmed by him that is within
60 feet of him; that charmed target must succeed on a DC
21 Charisma saving throw, or Titivilus decides how the target
acts during its next turn.
Teleport. Titivilus uses Teleport.
Assault (Costs 2 Actions). Titivilus makes one Silver Sword at­
tack, or he uses Frightful Word.

=== PAGE 243 ===
SILOPOTPECNOC
Tlincalli
Tlincallis, also called scorpion
folk, are chitin-covered creatures
with a humanlike upper body and
the lower body of an enormous scorpion,
complete with a stinger at the end of a long
tail. These desert creatures range across
arid lands, hunting at dawn and dusk. In the
hours between, they wait out the day’s heat or
the night’s cold by burying themselves in loose
sand or earth or, if the terrain proves too inflexi­
ble, lurking in ruins or shallow caves.
Tlincallis stay in one place for only as long as the
hunting is good in the immediate area, though they
might visit the same way stations over and over
during their wanderings. They also settle down tem­
porarily whenever it’s time to lay eggs and hatch a
new brood of young.
These scorpion folk deposit their eggs in warm
places out of direct sunlight, often amid a stand of
cacti near their present encampment. The eggs are
protected by hard shells coated in paralytic poison
similar to that produced by their stingers. This
poison leaves most would-be predators that dare to
break an egg defenseless when the tlincalli parents
come to investigate.
Tlincallis eat what they kill, whether their hunt
nets desert animals or a caravan, but when they
have new mouths to feed, they are careful to take
some of their prey alive. After using their stingers
to paralyze victims and their spiked chains to bind
them, tlincallis take these captives back to their en­
campment and tie them to cacti or rock formations.
When the sun sets, the newly hatched young emerge
from the lair to eat the captives alive.
These predators see themselves as great hunters,
and respect others with such skills. If a tlincalli
encounters a more powerful hunter, such as a blue
dragon, they carefully weigh whether to serve the
superior hunter, move on, or fight to the death to re­
move it as competition.
Tlincallis rarely build cities, make clothing, or
mine metals. Instead, they scavenge much of what
they need or want. They do, however, melt down
scavenged metal to forge crude weapons, armor,
and tools.
--col--
Tlincalli
Large Monstrosity, Typically Neutral
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 85 (10dl0 + 30)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 13 (+1) 16 (+3) 8 (-1) 12 (+1) 8 (-1)
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +4, Survival +4
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Tlincalli
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Actions
Multiattack. The tlincalli makes one Longsword or Spiked
Chain attack and one Sting attack.
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 7 (1 d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (IdlO + 3) slashing
damage if used with two hands.
Spiked Chain. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (1 d6 + 3) piercing damage, and the target is grap­
pled (escape DC 11) if it is a Large or smaller creature. Until
this grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the tlincalli can’t
use the spiked chain against another target.
Sting. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 6 (1 d6 + 3) piercing damage plus 14 (4d6) poison damage,
and the target must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving
throw or be poisoned for 1 minute. If it fails the saving throw by
5 or more, the target is also paralyzed while poisoned. The tar­
get can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns,
ending the effect on itself on a success. Q
-■ ■ ■ .......~ • ---------------
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 243

=== PAGE 244 ===
Tortles
Tortles are omnivorous, turtle-like bipeds with
shells that cover most of their bodies. Because they
carry their homes on their backs, tortles feel little
need to stay put for long.
Most tortles like to see how other folk live. A tortle
can spend decades away from their native land with­
out feeling homesick, often viewing their current
companions as their family.
Tortle
The generic tortle stat block here represents a war­
rior, especially the sort who travels far and wide.
Tortle Druid
Many tortles view the world as a place of wonder.
They live for the chance to hear a soft wind blowing
through trees, to watch a frog croaking on a lily pad,
or to stand in a crowded marketplace. A tortle druid
savors such things more than most, channeling the
natural magic of the world around them.
t. •...- —...... -
Tortle
Medium Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 17 (natural)
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 11 (+0) 13 (+1) 12 (+1)
Skills Athletics +4, Survival +3
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages Aquan, Common
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Hold Breath. The tortle can hold its breath for 1 hour.
Actions
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (1 d4 + 2) slashing damage.
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) piercing damage, or
6 (1 d8 + 2) piercing damage if used with two hands in melee.
Light Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, range 80/320
ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1 d8) piercing damage.
Shell Defense. The tortle withdraws into its shell. Until it
emerges, it gains a +4 bonus to AC and has advantage on
Strength and Constitution saving throws. While in its shell, the
tortle is prone, its speed is 0 and can’t increase, it has disad­
vantage on Dexterity saving throws, it can’t take reactions, and
the only action it can take is a bonus action to emerge.
244 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Tortle Druid
Medium Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 17 (natural)
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 11 (+0) 15 (+2) 12 (+1)
Skills Animal Handling +4, Nature +2, Survival +4
Senses passive Perception 12
Languages Aquan, Common
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Hold Breath. The tortle can hold its breath for 1 hour.
Actions
Multiattack. The tortle makes four Claw attacks or two Na­
ture’s Wrath attacks.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (1 d4 + 2) slashing damage.
Nature’s Wrath. Ranged Spell Attack: +4 to hit, range 90 ft., one
target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) damage of a type chosen by the tortle:
cold, fire, lightning, or thunder.
Shell Defense. The tortle withdraws into its shell. Until it
emerges, it gains a +4 bonus to AC and has advantage on
Strength and Constitution saving throws. While in its shell, the
tortle is prone, its speed is 0 and can’t increase, it has disad­
vantage on Dexterity saving throws, it can’t take reactions, and
the only action it can take is a bonus action to emerge.
Spellcasting. The tortle casts one of the following spells, using
Wisdom as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 12):
At will: druidcraft, guidance
2/day each: cure wounds, hold person, speak with animals,
thunderwave

=== PAGE 245 ===
Trapper
Large Monstrosity, Unaligned
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 68 (8dl0 + 24)
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 10 (+0) 17 (+3) 2 (-4) 13 (+1) 4 (-3)
Skills Stealth +2
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
False Appearance. If the trapper is motionless on a floor, wall,
or ceiling at the start of combat, it has advantage on its initia­
--col--
Trapper
A trapper is a manta-like creature that usually lurks
in subterranean environments. It can change the
color and texture of its tough, outward-facing side to
help it blend in with its surroundings, while its soft,
inward-facing side clings to the floor, wall, or ceiling
in its hunting territory. It remains motionless as it
waits for prey to come close. When a target is within
its reach, it peels itself away from the surface and
wraps around its prey, crushing, smothering, and
then digesting it. Only a scattering of bones, metal,
treasure, and other indigestible bits is left behind.
A trapper’s ability to alter the color and texture of
its outer side enables it to blend in with any surface
made of stone, earth, or wood, masking its presence
to any but the most rigorous scrutiny. It can’t change
its texture to that of a grassy or snow-covered sur­
face, but it is just cunning enough to change its color
to match and then conceal itself under a thin layer of
vegetation or actual snow.
A trapper that lurks on the floor of its hunting
grounds can cover any remains there with its body,
making them look like irregularities in the surface.
The creature might instead attach itself to a nearby
wall or a ceiling, using the remnants as bait; any
creature that stops to investigate the bones for valu­
ables becomes the trapper’s next meal.
A trapper needs to eat a halfling-sized meal once
per week to remain sated. Given a steady supply of
food, trappers are content to stay in one place, mak­
ing them a threat along well-traveled dungeon corri­
dor and on routes through the wilderness that see a
lot of traffic. When prey is scarce, a trapper enters a
state of hibernation that can last for months, though
it is still aware when prey comes near. A trapper on
the verge of starvation might defy its instincts and
abandon its old territory in search of better hunting.
tive roll. Moreover, if a creature hasn’t observed the trapper
move or act, that creature must succeed on a DC 18 Intelli­
gence (Investigation) check to discern that the trapper isn’t
part of the floor, wall, or ceiling.
Spider Climb. The trapper can climb difficult surfaces, includ­
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
Actions
Smother. One Large or smaller creature within 10 feet of the
trapper must succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw or
be grappled (escape DC 13). Until the grapple ends, the target
takes 13 (3d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 3 (1 d6) acid dam­
age at the start of each of its turns. While grappled in this way.
the target is restrained, blinded, and deprived of air. The trap­
per can smother only one creature at a time.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 245

=== PAGE 246 ===
Trolls
Trolls that are nearly obliterated but survive and
regenerate from mere scraps of flesh can display bi­
zarre features. Radically transformed trolls like the
rot trolls, spirit trolls, and venom trolls that follow
are especially likely to arise when trolls regener­
ate in the presence of magical emanations, planar
energy, disease, or death on a vast scale, or if their
bodies were damaged by elemental forces. These
unusual forms can also be produced and shaped by
the ritual magic of evil spellcasters or by trolls’ own
practices, as is the case for dire trolls.
Dire Troll
Huge Ciant, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 172 (15dl2+ 75)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
22 (+6) 15 (+2) 21 (+5) 9 (-1) 11 (+0) 5 (-3)
Saving Throws Wis +5, Cha +2
Skills Perception +10
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical attacks
Condition Immunities frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 20
Languages Giant
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +5
Regeneration. The troll regains 10 hit points at the start of its
turn. If the troll takes acid or fire damage, it regains only 5 hit
points at the start of its next turn. The troll dies only if it is hit
by an attack that deals 10 or more acid or fire damage while the
troll has 0 hit points.
Actions
Multiattack. The troll makes one Bite attack and four
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (1 d8 + 6) piercing damage plus 5 (IdlO) poi­
son damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (3d6 + 6) slashing damage.
Whirlwind of Claws (Recharge 5-6). Each creature within 10
feet of the troll must make a DC 19 Dexterity saving throw, tak­
ing 44 (8dl0) slashing damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one.
246 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Vaprak the Destroyer
Although trolls are rarely devout and seldom pon­
der spiritual questions, some fear and venerate the
entity known as Vaprak the Destroyer. Vaprak’s
true nature is something of a mystery, but Vaprak is
always portrayed as a horrid, misshapen, greenish
creature strongly resembling a troll. Vaprak is given
to fits of mindless destruction and uncontrollably
fears the plots and ambitions of other deities.
Vaprak’s troll worshipers believe this god devours
the souls of those who have been cooked or digested
(slain by fire or acid). Otherwise, the god spits the
soul back into the world to regenerate a new body.
Dire Troll
Trolls kill and eat almost anything—including, in
rare cases, other trolls. This cannibalism has the
effect of causing a troll to grow to an unusually large
size. The resulting dire trolls crave more and more
troll flesh to fuel their continued growth.
Dire trolls also increase their size by grafting
flesh onto themselves. When a slab of quivering troll
flesh is bound against a fresh wound on a dire troll,
the dire troll’s regenerative capacity incorporates
the new mass into the troll’s own musculature. Even
more horrifying are the multiple arms, eyes, claws,
and organs that dire trolls tear from their victims
and graft onto themselves in this manner.

=== PAGE 247 ===
Rot Troll
Large Giant, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 138 (12dl0+ 72)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 13 (+1) 22 (+6) 5 H) 8(-l) 4 (-3)
Skills Perception +3
Damage Immunities necrotic
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Giant
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Rancid Degeneration. At the end of each of the troll’s turns,
each creature within 5 feet of it takes 11 (2dl 0) necrotic dam­
age, unless the troll has taken acid or fire damage since the end
of its last turn.
Actions
Multiattack. The troll makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 9 (IdlO + 4) piercing damage plus 16 (3dl0) ne­
crotic damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) ne
erotic damage.
--col--
Rot Troll
A troll infused with waves of necroti r -r. is :
regenerates can develop a symbiotic rela: . - -' :
with that deathly power. The troll's body wither?
and the flesh falls away from the body as quick?, as
it forms. Eventually a rot troll becomes unable to
regenerate, though the troll still heals normally. The
creature courses with necrotic energy; simply stand­
ing near a rot troll exposes other creatures to lethal
emanations.
Spirit Troll
A troll blasted with psychic energy can take a non­
physical form upon regenerating. The troll’s psyche
survives, but the body is as insubstantial as shadow.
The troll might be unaware of the transition—the
creature still moves and attacks with teeth and
claws as ever—but now the troll strikes at vic­
tims’ minds.
Spirit Troll
Large Giant, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 130 (20dl0 + 20)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
1 (-5) 17 (+3) 13 (+1) 8 (-1) 9 (-1) 16 (+3)
Skills Perception +3
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical attacks
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed,
petrified, prone, restrained, unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Giant
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Incorporeal Movement. The troll can move through other
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5
(IdlO) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object.
Regeneration. The troll regains 10 hit points at the start of its
turn. If the troll takes psychic or force damage, this trait doesn’t
function at the start of the troll’s next turn. The troll dies only if
it starts its turn with 0 hit points and doesn't regenerate.
Actions
Multiattack. The troll makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 19 (3dl0 + 3) psychic damage, and the target must suc­
ceed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be stunned for 1 min­
ute. The stunned target can repeat the saving throw at the end
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 19 (3dl0 + 3) psychic damage.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 247

=== PAGE 248 ===
—...
Venom Troll
Large Ciant, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 94 (9dl0 + 45)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 13 (+1) 20 (+5) 7 (-2) 9(-l) 7 (-2)
Skills Perception +5
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Giant
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Poison Splash. When the troll takes damage of any type but
psychic, each creature within 5 feet of the troll takes 9 (2d8)
poison damage.
Regeneration. The troll regains 10 hit points at the start of its
turn. If the troll takes acid or fire damage, this trait doesn't
function at the start of the troll’s next turn. The troll dies only if
it starts its turn with 0 hit points and doesn't regenerate.
24.8 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Venom Troll
A troll that survives massive doses of poison might
transform into a venom troll. Lingering poison in­
fuses the troll’s blood and tissue, and poison leaks
from the pores to coat the troll’s fangs and claws.
These creatures are especially dangerous in close
combat because poison drips off their flesh and
sprays out from every wound they receive.
Actions
Multiattack. The troll makes one Bite attack and two
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 7 (1 d6 + 4) piercing damage plus 4 (1 d8) poison damage,
and the target is poisoned until the start of the troll’s next turn.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage plus 4 (1 d8) poison damage.
Venom Spray (Recharge 6). The troll slices itself with a claw,
releasing a spray of poison in a 15-foot cube. The troll takes
7 (2d6) slashing damage, which can’t be reduced in any way.
Each creature in the area must make a DC 16 Constitution
saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 18 (4d8) poison
damage and is poisoned for 1 minute. On a successful save,
the creature takes half as much damage and isn’t poisoned.
A poisoned creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.

=== PAGE 249 ===
Very rarely, when a tadpole from the brine pool of an
elder brain (appears in this book) is implanted into a
creature, that creature transforms into an ulitharid:
a larger and more potent mind flayer with six tenta­
cles. Illithids innately recognize that an ulitharid’s
survival is more important than their own. An elder
brain’s reaction to the rise of an ulitharid varies.
In most colonies, the ulitharid becomes an elder
brain’s most favored servant, invested with power
and authority. In others, the elder brain perceives
an ulitharid as a potential rival and manipulates or
quashes the ulitharid’s ambitions accordingly.
When an ulitharid finds sharing leadership with
an elder brain insufferable, it breaks off from the
colony, taking a group of mind flayers with it, and
moves to another location to form a new colony.
After the death of the ulitharid’s body, a special pro­
cess transforms its brain into a new elder brain for
the colony.
This process doesn’t work on the brain of an uli­
tharid that dies a natural death, as such brains are
too decrepit to be used. Instead, each ulitharid car­
ries a psionically enhanced staff; when the ulitharid
is ready to give up its life, it attaches the staff to the
back of its head, and the staff cracks open its skull,
enabling its brain to be extracted. The brain and the
staff are then planted in the ulitharid’s corpse, caus­
ing it to dissolve into ichor. This psionically potent
slime helps to fuel the transformation of the area
into a brine pool for the embryonic elder brain.
--col--
Ulitharid
Large Aberration (Mind Flayer), Typically Lawful Evil
