Hobgoblin Devastator
Medium Fey (Coblinoid), Typically Lawful Neutral
Armor Class 13 (studded leather)
Hit Points 45 (7d8 + 14)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
13 (+1) 12 (+1) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 13 (+1) 11 (+0)
Skills Arcana +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Common, Goblin
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Army Arcana. When the hobgoblin casts a spell that causes
damage or that forces other creatures to make a saving throw,
it can choose itself and any number of allies to be immune to
the damage caused by the spell and to succeed on the required
saving throw.
Actions
Multiattack. The hobgoblin makes two Quarterstaff or Devas­
tating Bolt attacks.
Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1 d6 + 1) bludgeoning damage, or 5 (1 d8 + 1)
bludgeoning damage if used with two hands, plus 13 (3d8)
force damage.
Devastating Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 60 ft.,
one target. Hit: 21 (4d8 + 3) force damage, and the target is
knocked prone.
Spellcasting. The hobgoblin casts one of the following spells,
using Intelligence as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 13):
At will: mage hand, prestidigitation
2/day each: fireball, fly, fog cloud, gust of wind, lightning bolt
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 153

=== PAGE 154 ===
Hobgoblin Iron Shadow
Iron shadows are hobgoblin martial artists who
serve fey and mortal courts as secret police, scouts,
and assassins. They spy to ferret out treachery,
rebellion, and betrayal and deal with it ruthlessly.
Iron shadows possess agility and stamina matched
only by their ironclad commitment to the will of
their masters. They wield a deadly combination of
unarmed fighting techniques and shadow magic to
deceive and defeat their foes. While on secret mis­
sions, they wear masks crafted to resemble mon­
sters, both to conceal their identities and to strike
fear into their foes.
An iron shadow is usually recruited from the
ranks of the Feywild’s hobgoblin armies or from
among the hobgoblins who have resided in the Ma­
terial Plane for centuries. A candidate for admission
undergoes a series of tests designed to reveal any
potential for treachery. Those who fail are slain,
154 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
while those who pass receive secret training in the
arts of magic and stealth. This indoctrination is a
slow and arduous process; many aspirants don’t
finish it, and years might go by during which the
iron shadows welcome no new members into their
ranks. When a recruit’s training is complete, they
are tasked with conducting assassinations and
spy missions.
Hobgoblin Iron Shadow
Medium Fey (Goblinoid), Typically Lawful Neutral
Armor Class 15 (Unarmored Defense)
Hit Points 32 (5d8 + 10)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 14 (+2) 15 (+2) 11 (+0)
Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +4, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Common, Goblin
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Unarmored Defense. While the hobgoblin is wearing no armor
and wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom modifier.
Actions
Multiattack. The hobgoblin makes four attacks, each of which
can be an Unarmed Strike or a Dart attack. It can also use
Shadow Jaunt once, either before or after one of the attacks.
Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 5 (1 d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage.
Dart. Ranged Weapon Attack. +5 to hit, range 20/60 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 5 (1 d4 + 3) piercing damage.
Shadow Jaunt. The hobgoblin teleports, along with any equip­
ment it is wearing or carrying, up to 30 feet to an unoccupied
space it can see. Both the space it leaves and its destination
must be in dim light or darkness.
Spellcasting. The hobgoblin casts one of the following spells,
using Intelligence as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 12):
At will: minor illusion, prestidigitation
1/day each: charm person, disguise self, silent image

=== PAGE 155 ===
Howler
A far-off wail precedes the sight of a howler. Even
at a distance, listeners’ minds cringe at the sound
and fill with horror at the realization that the noise
is drawing closer. When howlers go on the prowl,
courage isn’t enough to stand up against them.
These nightmare creatures are native to Pan­
demonium, but they can be found on most of the
Lower Planes, where they are trained as war
hounds. Howlers can be domesticated, after a
fashion, but they respond only to brutal training in
which they are forced to recognize the trainer as
the pack’s undisputed leader. A trained pack then
follows its leader without hesitation. Howler packs
course over the battlefields of the Blood War and
also serve evil mortals powerful and vicious enough
to command their loyalty.
Howlers rely on speed, numbers, and their
mind-numbing howling to corner prey before they
tear it apart. Their howls flood the minds of their
victims, making complex thought impossible. Lis­
teners can do little more than stare in horror and
stumble around the battlefield in a search for safety.
Fiends especially prize howlers for this reason,
because for a few crucial moments in a battle, their
howls can neutralize an enemy.
--col--
Howler
Large Fiend, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 90 (12dl0 + 24)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
17 (+3) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 5 (-3) 14 (+2) 6 (-2)
Skills Perception +5
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Condition Immunities frightened
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages understands Abyssal but can't speak
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Pack Tactics. A howler has advantage on attack rolls against a
creature if at least one of the howler's allies is within 5 feet of
the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated.
Actions
Multiattack. The howler makes two Rending Bite attacks.
Rending Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage, plus 22 (4dl0)
psychic damage if the target is frightened. This attack ignores
damage resistance.
Mind-Breaking Howl (Recharge 4-6). The howler emits a keen­
ing howl in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must
succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom saving throw or take 16 (3dl0)
psychic damage and be frightened until the end of the howler’s
next turn. While a creature is frightened in this way, its speed is
halved, and it is incapacitated. A target that successfully saves
is immune to the Mind-Breaking Howl of all howlers for the
next 24 hours.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 155

=== PAGE 156 ===
Hutijin
Politics in the Nine Hells are anything but predict­
able. Alliances form all the time, but most wind up
unraveling due to treachery. Nevertheless, for all
their backbiting and betrayal, devils do occasionally
display loyalty, offering unwavering service to their
masters. One such example is Hutijin, a duke of Ca-
nia and loyal servant of Mephistopheles.
Across the Hells, Hutijin’s name fills lesser devils
with fear and loathing, for this duke commands two
companies of pit fiends (see the Monster Manual).
With such soldiers under his command, Hutijin can
easily crush any rival who gets in his way while also
defending Mephistopheles against armies seek­
ing to contest his dominion. Hutijin has amassed
enough power to challenge the lord of Cania, but he
has never wavered in his support for his master-
suggesting, perhaps, that Mephistopheles has some
hold over him.
jKg CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Outside the Nine Hells, Hutijin is a relatively
obscure figure, known only to the most learned in­
fernal scholars. He has no cults of his own, and his
servants are few in number. The reason is simple:
Hutijin hates mortals. When summoned from the
Hells, he repays the instigator with a long and ago­
nizing death.
Mephistopheles forbids Hutijin from making
too many forays into the Material Plane, since the
duke’s absence leaves him vulnerable to his rivals.
Other archdevils know how much Hutijin despises
mortals and have secretly disseminated the means
to call him from the Nine Hells in the hope of
distracting the archdevil long enough for them to
assail Mephistopheles. Hutijin sends devils into the
Material Plane to eradicate mention of his name
and destroy those who have learned of him, but the
summonings still occur. When called from his post,
he negotiates as quickly as he can, usually closing a
deal with little cost to the summoner. However, once
the deal has been fulfilled, Hutijin repays the inter­
ruption with death.

=== PAGE 157 ===
Hutijin
Large Fiend (Devil), Lawful Evil
Armor Class 19 (natural armor)
Hit Points 200 (16dl0 + 112)
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
27 (+8) 15 (+2) 25 (+7) 23 (+6) 19 (+4) 25 (+7)
Saving Throws Dex +9, Con +14, Wis +11
Skills Intimidation +14, Perception +11
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
Damage Immunities fire, poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 21
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 21 (33,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus+7
Infernal Despair. Each creature within 30 feet of Hutijin that
isn’t a devil makes saving throws with disadvantage.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Hutijin fails a saving throw, he
can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Hutijin has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Regeneration. Hutijin regains 20 hit points at the start of his
turn. If he takes radiant damage, this trait doesn’t function at
the start of his next turn. Hutijin dies only if he starts his turn
with 0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate.
Actions
Multiattack. Hutijin makes one Bite attack, one Claw attack,
one Mace attack, and one Tail attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) fire damage. The target must succeed on a DC
22 Constitution saving throw or become poisoned. While poi­
soned in this way, the target can’t regain hit points, and it takes
10 (3d6) poison damage at the start of each of its turns. The
poisoned target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each
of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
--col--
—
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) cold damage.
Mace. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) force damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 19 (2dl0 + 8) thunder damage.
Spellcasting. Hutijin casts one of the following spells, requiring
no material components and using Charisma as the spellcast­
ing ability (spell save DC 22):
At will: alter self (can become Medium when changing his ap­
pearance), detect magic, hold monster, invisibility (self only),
lightning bolt, suggestion, wall of fire
3/day: dispel magic
Teleport. Hutijin teleports, along with any equipment he is
wearing and carrying, up to 120 feet to an unoccupied space
he can see.
Reactions
Fearful Voice (Recharge 5-6). In response to taking damage,
Hutijin utters a dreadful word of power. Each creature within 30
feet of him that isn’t a devil must succeed on a DC 22 Wisdom
saving throw or become frightened of him for 1 minute. A crea­
ture can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns,
ending the effect on itself on a success. A creature that saves
against this effect is immune to his Fearful Voice for 24 hours.
Legendary Actions
Hutijin can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op­
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at
a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Hutijin
regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn.
Attack. Hutijin makes one Claw, Mace, or Tail attack.
Teleport. Hutijin uses Teleport.
Lightning Storm (Costs 2 Actions). Hutijin releases lightning in
a 30-foot radius, blocked only by total cover. All other crea­
tures in that area must each make a DC 22 Dexterity saving
throw, taking 18 (4d8) lightning damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one.

=== PAGE 158 ===
Hydroloth
Like the thought-stealing waters of the River
Styx they inhabit, hydroloths filch the memories
of creatures they attack, stealing away thoughts
for delivery to whatever master they happen to
serve. Hydroloths also savor finding lost things,
especially those that have been swallowed up in
the deeps.
For amphibious assaults or underwater
conflicts, hydroloths have no equal among
yugoloths. They sometimes hire them­
selves out to attack and scuttle ships and
raid coastal settlements.
Hydroloth
Medium Fiend (Yugoloth), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 15
Hit Points 135 (18d8 + 54)
Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
12 (+1) 21 (+5) 16 (+3) 19 (+4) 10 (+0) 14 (+2)
Skills Insight +4, Perception +4
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Resistances cold, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities acid, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Abyssal, Infernal, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Amphibious. The hydroloth can breathe air and water.
Magic Resistance. The hydroloth has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Secure Memory. The hydroloth is immune to the waters of the
River Styx, as well as any effect that would steal or modify its
memories or detect or read its thoughts.
Watery Advantage. While submerged in liquid, the hydroloth
has advantage on attack rolls.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Actions
Multiattack. The hydroloth makes two Bite or Claw attacks. It
can replace one attack with a use of Spellcasting.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (2dl0 + 5) force damage plus 9 (2dl0) psychic damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) force damage plus 9 (2dl0) psychic damage.
Spellcasting. The hydroloth casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Intelligence as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 16):
At will: darkness, detect magic, dispel magic, invisibility (self only)
3/day each: control water, crown of madness, fear, suggestion
Steal Memory (1/Day). The hydroloth targets one creature it
can see within 60 feet of it. The target takes 14 (4d6) psychic
damage, and it must make a DC 16 Intelligence saving throw.
On a successful save, the target becomes immune to this
hydroloth’s Steal Memory for 24 hours. On a failed save, the
target loses all proficiencies; it can’t cast spells; it can’t under­
stand language; and if its Intelligence and Charisma scores are
higher than 5, they become 5. Each time the target finishes a
long rest, it can repeat the saving throw, ending the effect on
itself on a success. A greater restoration or remove curse spell
cast on the target ends this effect early.
Teleport. The hydroloth teleports, along with any equipment
it is wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space
it can see.

=== PAGE 159 ===
JUIBLEX
Called the Faceless Lord and the Oozing Hunger
in ancient grimoires, Juiblex is demon lord of slime
and ooze, a noxious creature that doesn’t care about
the plots and schemes of others of its kind. It exists
only to consume, digesting and transforming living
matter into more of itself.
A true horror, Juiblex is a mass of bubbling slime,
swirling black and green, with glaring red eyes
floating and shifting within it. It can rise up like a
20-foot hill, lashing out with dripping pseudopods
to drag victims into its bulk. Those consumed by
Juiblex are obliterated.
Juiblex’s Lair
Juiblex’s principal lair is known as the Slime Pits, a
realm that Juiblex shares with Zuggtmoy (who also
appears in this book). This layer of the Abyss, which
is also known as Shedaklah, is a bubbling morass
of fetid sludge. The landscape is covered in vast ex­
panses of caustic slimes, and strange organic forms
rise from the oceans of ooze at Juiblex’s command.
Juiblex’s challenge rating is 24 (62,000 XP) when
encountered in its lair.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), Juiblex
can take one of the following lair actions; it can’t
take the same lair action two rounds in a row:
Green Slime. A green slime (see the Dungeon Mas­
ter’s Guide) appears on a spot on the ceiling that
Juiblex chooses within the lair. The slime disinte­
grates after 1 hour.
Slippery Slime. Juiblex slimes a square area of
ground it can see within the lair. The area can be
up to 10 feet on a side. When the slime appears,
each creature on it must succeed on a DC 21
Dexterity saving throw or fall prone and slide 10
feet in a random direction determined by a d8 roll.
When a creature enters the area for the first time
on a turn or ends its turn there, that creature must
make the same save.
The slime lasts for 1 hour or until it is burned
away with fire. If the slime is set on fire, it burns
away after 1 round. Any creature that starts
its turn in the burning slime takes 22 (4dl0)
fire damage.
Sticky Slime. Juiblex slimes a square area of
ground it can see within the lair. The area can be
up to 10 feet on a side. When the slime appears,
each creature in that area must succeed on a DC
21 Strength saving throw or become restrained.
When a creature enters the area for the first time
on a turn or ends its turn there, that creature must
make the same save.
--col--
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 159

=== PAGE 160 ===
A restrained creature is stuck as long as it re­
mains in the slimy area or until it breaks free. The
restrained creature, or another creature that can
reach it, can use its action to try to break free and
must succeed on a DC 21 Strength check.
The slime lasts for 1 hour or until it is burned
away with fire. If the slime is set on fire, it burns
away after 1 round. Any creature that starts
its turn in the burning slime takes 22 (4dl0)
fire damage.
Regional Effects
The region containing Juiblex’s lair is warped by its
magic, creating one or more of the following effects:
Acidic Water. Small bodies of water, such as ponds
or wells, within 1 mile of the lair turn highly
acidic, corroding any object that touches them.
Corrupted Nature. Within 6 miles of the lair, all
Wisdom (Medicine) and Wisdom (Survival) checks
have disadvantage.
Juiblex
Huge Fiend (Demon), Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 350 (28dl2+ 168)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
24 (+7) 10 (+0) 23 (+6) 20 (+5) 20 (+5) 16 (+3)
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +13, Wis +12
Skills Perception +12
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities acid, poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing that is nonmagical
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion,
frightened, grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone,
restrained, stunned, unconscious
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 22
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 23 (50,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
Foul. Any creature other than an Ooze that starts its turn within
10 feet ofJuiblex must succeed on a DC 21 Constitution saving
throw or be poisoned until the start of the creature’s next turn.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Juiblex fails a saving throw, it
can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Juiblex has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Regeneration. Juiblex regains 20 hit points at the start of its
turn. If it takes fire or radiant damage, this trait doesn’t func­
tion at the start of its next turn. Juiblex dies only if it starts its
turn with 0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate.
Spider Climb. Juiblex can climb difficult surfaces, includ­
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an
ability check.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Slime. Surfaces within 6 miles of the lair are fre­
quently covered by a thin film of slime, which is
slick and sticks to anything that touches it.
If Juiblex dies, these effects fade over the course of
Id 10 days.
Cultists ofJuiblex
The Faceless Lord grants its cultists special abili­
ties. Lesser followers can gain the Liquid Movement
trait. The most dedicated devotees of ooze can also
gain the Slimy Organs trait.
Liquid Movement. As an action, this creature can move up to
20 feet through spaces no more than an inch in diameter. It
must end this movement in a space that can accommodate its
full size. Otherwise, it takes 5 force damage and returns to the
space where it began this movement.
Slimy Organs. This creature has resistance to bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing damage from nonmagical attacks.
Whenever this creature suffers a critical hit or is reduced to 0
hit points, it sprays acid; each creature within 5 feet of it takes
acid damage equal to its number of Hit Dice.
Actions
Multiattack. Juiblex makes three Acid Lash attacks.
Acid Lash. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10
ft. or range 60/120 ft., one target. Hit: 21 (4d6 + 7) acid dam­
age. Any creature killed by this attack is drawn into Juiblex’s
body, where the corpse is dissolved after 1 minute.
Eject Slime (Recharge 5-6). Juiblex spews out a corrosive slime,
targeting one creature that it can see within 60 feet of it. The
target must succeed on a DC 21 Dexterity saving throw or take
55 (lOdlO) acid damage. Unless the target avoids taking all of
this damage, any metal armor worn by the target takes a per­
manent -1 penalty to the AC it offers, and any metal weapon
the target is carrying or wearing takes a permanent -1 penalty
to damage rolls. The penalty worsens each time a target is sub­
jected to this effect. If the penalty on an object drops to -5, the
object is destroyed. The penalty on an object can be removed
by the mending spell.
Spellcasting. Juiblex casts one of the following spells, requiring
no material components and using Wisdom as the spellcasting
ability (spell save DC 20):
At will: detect magic
3/day each: contagion, gaseousform
Legendary Actions
Juiblex can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the options
below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a time
and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Juiblex regains
spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
