5 Small note with the words “It’s been fun!” writ­
ten on it in an ornate script
6 Glass bead that looks like an eye
7 Pistachio shells
8 Two playing cards balanced against each other,
resembling a tent
9 Worthless coin with a bite mark in it
10 Chalk or charcoal sketch of a domino mask

=== PAGE 175 ===
Maurezhi
Medium Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 88 (16d8+ 16)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 17 (+3) 12 (+1) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 15 (+2)
Skills Deception +5
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning, necrotic; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages Abyssal, Elvish, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Assume Form. The maurezhi can assume the appearance of any
Medium Humanoid it eats. It remains in this form for 1 d6 days,
during which time the form gradually decays until, when the
effect ends, the form sloughs from the demon's body.
Magic Resistance. The maurezhi has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The maurezhi makes one Bite attack and one
Claw attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (2dl 0 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a Humanoid,
its Charisma score is reduced by 1 d4. This reduction lasts until
the target finishes a short or long rest. The target dies if this
reduces its Charisma to 0. It rises 24 hours later as a ghoul (see
the Monster Manual), unless it has been revived or its corpse
has been destroyed.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) slashing damage. If the target is a creature
other than an Undead, it must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution
saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The target can re­
peat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the
effect on itself on a success.
Raise Choul (Recharge 5-6). The maurezhi targets one dead
ghoul or ghast (see the Monster Manual) it can see within 30
feet of it. The target is revived with all its hit points.
--col--
Maurezhi
When Doresain, the King of Ghouls, corrupted a
society of elves, he created a new sort of demon—
the maurezhi—to lead packs of ghouls and ghasts
(both appear in the Monster Manual) on the Mate­
rial Plane.
When a maurezhi consumes the corpse of a Hu­
manoid it has slain—a process that takes about 10
minutes—it instantly assumes the creature’s appear­
ance as it was in life. The new appearance begins to
rot away over the next few days, eventually revealing
the demon’s original form.
A maurezhi is contagion incarnate. Its bite can
drain a victim’s sense of self. If this affliction is al­
lowed to go far enough, the victim is infected with
an unholy hunger for flesh that overpowers their
personality and transforms them into a ghoul.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 175

=== PAGE 176 ===
I once pulled a whole bottle of fine strawberry
liquor from the belly of a maw demon. No clue
where it might've devoured Such a find/ but I m
not complaining.
TASHA
Maw Demon
Maw demons share the ceaseless hunger for car­
nage and mortal flesh of their master, Yeenoghu,
who appears in this book. After a maw demon rests
for 8 hours, anything devoured by it is transported
directly into the Lord of Savagery’s gullet.
Maw demons appear among gnoll war bands that
worship Yeenoghu, usually summoned as part of
ritual offerings of freshly slain Humanoids made to
him. The gnolls don’t command the demons, which
simply accompany the war band and attack what­
ever creatures the gnolls fall upon.
Because maw demons are indiscriminate in their
hunger, their stomachs contain all manner of oddi­
ties in addition to the remains of their recent prey.
You may choose one or more items appropriate for
your campaign for a maw demon to contain, or roll
on the Maw Demon’s Stomach Contents table.
Maw Demon’s Stomach Contents
d8 Stomach Contents
1 Intact wine skin with wine still in it
2 Iron skillet
3 Remnants of silk banner embroidered with a
moon-and-stars motif
4 Corroded gauntlet with skeletal hand in it
5 Assorted keys
6 Old leather boot
7 Beehive
8 Humanoid teeth
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Maw Demon
Medium Fiend (Demon), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 8(-l) 13 (+1) 5 (-3) 8 (-1) 5 (-3)
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9
Languages understands Abyssal but can’t speak
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d8 + 2) piercing damage.
Disgorge (Recharge 6). The demon vomits in a 15-foot cube.
Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 11 Dexterity
saving throw or take 11 (2dl0) acid damage and fall prone
in the spew.

=== PAGE 177 ===
Meazel
Meazels are malicious hermits who fled to the Shad­
owfell to escape their mortal existence and contem­
plate their misery. There the shadows transformed
them, and their bitterness made them twisted and
cruel. Now hate burns in their hearts, and
they resent any intrusion into their suffer­
ing, waylaying travelers who venture too
close to their lairs.
The evil that corrupted meazels also im­
bued them with magical powers that allow
them to move through shadows with ease.
They can step from one pool of darkness
into another one, using this talent to am­
bush prey. Sometimes they snatch victims
around the throat with their strangling
cords and then step away; other times they
ferry their victims to isolated spots and then
leave the hapless souls to the designs of
whatever horrors lurk there.
Any creatures meazels draw through the
shadows are cursed by the meazels’ baleful magic.
The curse acts as a beacon; sorrowsworn (which ap­
pear in this book), Undead, and other terrors sense
where they are located and descend on the stranded
victims to tear them apart.
i :
Meazel
Medium Monstrosity, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 35 (10d8 - 10)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
8 (-1) 17 (+3) 9 (-1) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 10 (+0)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Common
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions
Garrote. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target
of the meazel’s size or smaller. Hit: 6 (1 d6 + 3) bludgeoning
damage, and the target is grappled (escape DC 13 with disad­
vantage). Until the grapple ends, the target takes 10 (2d6 + 3)
bludgeoning damage at the start of each of the meazel’s turns.
The meazel can’t make weapon attacks while grappling a crea­
ture in this way.
--col--
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 6 (1 d6 + 3) piercing damage plus 3 (1 d6) ne­
crotic damage.
Shadow Teleport (Recharge 5-6). The meazel, any equipment it
is wearing or carrying, and any creature it is grappling teleport
to an unoccupied space within 500 feet of it, provided that the
starting space and the destination are in dim light or darkness.
The destination must be a place the meazel has seen before,
but it need not be within line of sight. If the destination space
is occupied, the teleportation leads to the nearest unoccu­
pied space.
Any other creature the meazel teleports becomes cursed for
1 hour or until the curse is ended by remove curse or greater
restoration. Until this curse ends, every Undead and every
creature native to the Shadowfell within 300 feet of the cursed
creature can sense it, which prevents that creature from hiding
from them.
Bonus Actions
Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the meazel
takes the Hide action.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 177

=== PAGE 178 ===
Meenlock
Meenlocks are Fey that invoke terror and seek to de­
stroy all that is good, innocent, and beautiful. These
bipeds have the heads and claws of crustaceans,
and they primarily live in forests, although they
adapt well to urban and subterranean settings.
Meenlocks are spawned by fear. When terror
overwhelms a creature in the Feywild or another
location where the Feywild’s influence is strong, one
or more meenlocks might spontaneously arise in
the shadows or darkness nearby. If more than one
meenlock is born, a lair also magically forms. The
earth creaks and moans as narrow, twisting tunnels
open up within it. One of these passageways serves
as the lair’s only entrance, and a large central cham­
ber serves as the meenlocks’ den. Inside the warren,
black moss covers every surface, muffling sound.
A meenlock can supernaturally sense areas of
darkness and shadow in its vicinity and can teleport
from one darkened space to another—enabling it to
sneak up on its prey or run away when outmatched.
Meenlocks also project a supernatural aura that in­
stills terror in those nearby.
Tele pat hic To r m e n t
Up to four meenlocks can telepathically torment
one incapacitated creature, filling its mind with dis­
turbing sounds and dreadful imagery. Participating
meenlocks can’t use their telepathy for any other
purpose during this time, though they can move
about and take actions and reactions as normal.
This torment has no effect on a creature that is im­
mune to the frightened condition. If the creature is
susceptible and remains incapacitated for 1 hour,
the creature must make a Wisdom saving throw,
taking 10 (3d6) psychic damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one. The save
DC is 10 + the number of meenlocks participating
in the torment, considering only those that remain
within sight of the victim for the entire hour and
aren’t incapacitated during it. The process can be
repeated. A Humanoid that drops to 0 hit points as
a result of this damage instantly transforms into a
meenlock at full health and under the DM’s control.
Only a wish spell or divine intervention can restore
a transformed creature to its former state.
I78 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Meenlock
Small Fey, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 31 (7d6 + 7)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
7 (-2) 15 (+2) 12 (+1) 11 (+0) 10 (+0) 8 (-1)
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +6, Survival +2
Condition Immunities frightened
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Fear Aura. Any Beast or Humanoid that starts its turn within 10
feet of the meenlock must succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving
throw or be frightened until the start of the creature’s next turn.
Light Sensitivity. While in bright light, the meenlock has dis­
advantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on sight.
Actions
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage, and the target must succeed
on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 min­
ute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each
of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
Bonus Actions
Shadow Teleport (Recharge 5-6). The meenlock teleports to an
unoccupied space within 30 feet of it, provided that both the
space it’s teleporting from and its destination are in dim light
or darkness. The destination need not be within line of sight.

=== PAGE 179 ===
M
The
gua
find
reg
leg
pla
M
nee
a m
ma
ide
the
B
form
inu
dan
retr
M
Med
Arm
Hit
Spe
S
18
Dam
fro
Dam
Con
Sen
Lan
te
Cha
Dev
dark
Mag
thro
Ac
Mul
Halb
get.
Hea
100
Re
Loy
rego
hit i
--col--
Merregon
e souls of fallen soldiers, mercenaries, and body­
ards who served evil without reservation often
d everlasting servitude in the Nine Hells as mer-
gons. These faceless foot soldiers are the Hells’
gionnaires, tasked with protecting their infernal
ane and its rulers against intruders.
Merregons have no individuality and hence no
ed for faces. Every merregon legionnaire has
metal mask bolted to its head. Markings on the
ask indicate the only elements of the wearer’s
entity that matter: the commander it serves and
e layer of the Nine Hells it protects.
Because of their unshakable loyalty, merregons
m the backbone of many devils’ protective ret­
ues. They shrink from no task, no matter how
ngerous. Unless ordered to fall back, they never
reat from a fight.
Merregon
dium Fiend (Devil), Typically Lawful Evil
mor Class 16 (natural armor)
Points 45 (6d8+ 18)
eed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
8 (+4) 14 (+2) 17 (+3) 6 (-2) 12 (+1) 8 (-1)
mage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
om nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered
mage Immunities fire, poison
ndition Immunities frightened, poisoned
nses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
nguages understands Infernal but can’t speak,
elepathy 120 ft.
allenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
vil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the merregon’s
kvision.
gic Resistance. The merregon has advantage on saving
ows against spells and other magical effects.
ctions
ltiattack. The merregon makes three Halberd attacks.
berd. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar­
. Hit: 9 (IdlO + 4) slashing damage.
avy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range
0/400 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (IdlO + 2) piercing damage.
eactions
yal Bodyguard. When another Fiend within 5 feet of the mer­
on is hit by an attack roll, the merregon causes itself to be
instead.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 179

=== PAGE 180 ===
Merrenoloth
The grim captains of the ferries on the River Styx,
merrenoloths can navigate safely through the worst
storms and always stay on course. Wielding fiery
oars, merrenoloths strike fear into anyone who
forcefully boards their vessels.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties) while
captaining a vessel, the merrenoloth can take one of
the following lair actions; it can’t take the same lair
action two rounds in a row:
Gale. The air within 60 feet of the vessel is filled
with wind. Until initiative count 20 on the next
round, that area is difficult terrain, and when
a Medium or smaller creature flies into that
area or starts its turn flying there, it must suc­
ceed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Propel. A strong wind propels the vessel, increas­
ing its speed by 30 feet until initiative count 20 on
the next round.
Repair. The vessel regains 22 (4dl0) hit points.
Regional Effects
A merrenoloth imbues its vessel with magic that
creates one or more of the following effects:
Unerring. The vessel always stays on course to the
destination the merrenoloth names.
Unsinkable. The vessel doesn’t sink even if its hull
is breached.
If the merrenoloth dies, these effects fade over the
course of ld6 hours.
Merrenoloth
Medium Fiend (Yugoloth), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 40 (9d8)
Speed 30 ft., swim 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
8 (-1) 17 (+3) 10 (+0) 17 (+3) 14 (+2) 11 (+0)
Saving Throws Dex +5, I nt +5
Skills History +5, Nature +5, Perception +4, Survival +4
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities acid, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft.,
passive Perception 14
Languages Abyssal, Infernal, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Magic Resistance. The merrenoloth has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
.......................
j8q CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Actions
Multiattack. The merrenoloth makes one Oar attack and uses
Fear Gaze.
Oar. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) fire damage.
Fear Caze. The merrenoloth targets one creature it can see
within 60 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 13 Wis­
dom saving throw or become frightened of the merrenoloth
for 1 minute. The frightened target can repeat the saving throw
at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on
a success.
Spellcasting. The merrenoloth casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Intelligence as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 13):
At will: charm person, darkness, detect magic, dispel magic,
gust of wind
3/day: control water
Bonus Actions
Teleport. The merrenoloth teleports, along with any equipment
it is wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space
it can see.
.......-

=== PAGE 181 ===
Mindwitness
Large Aberration, Typically Lawful Neutral
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 75 (10dl0 + 20)
Speed 0 ft., fly 20 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
10 (+0) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 15 (+2) 15 (+2) 10 (+0)
Saving Throws Int +5, Wis +5
Skills Perception +8
Condition Immunities prone
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon, telepathy 600 ft.
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Telepathic Hub. When the mindwitness receives a telepathic
message, it can telepathically share that message with up to
seven other creatures within 600 feet of it that it can see.
Actions
Multiattack. The mindwitness makes one Bite attack and one
Tentacles attack, or it uses Eye Ray three times.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 16 (4d6 + 2) piercing damage.
Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
creature. Hit: 20 (4d8 + 2) psychic damage. If the target is
Large or smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 13), and it must suc­
ceed on a DC 13 Intelligence saving throw or be restrained until
this grapple ends.
--col--
Mindwitness
If a beholder is stunned and brought to the brine
pool of an elder brain (appears in this book), the
beholder can be converted into a mindwitness.
This alters some of its eye rays and transforms
four of its eyestalks into tentacles similar to a mind
flayer’s. The mindwitness is psychically imprinted
with devotion to the elder brain and submission to
illithid commands.
A mindwitness’s primary function is to improve
telepathic communication in a mind flayer colony. A
creature in telepathic communication with a mind­
witness can converse through it to as many as seven
other creatures the mindwitness can see, rapidly
disseminating commands and other information.
If separated from its illithid masters, a mindwit­
ness seeks out other telepathic creatures to tell it
what to do. Mindwitnesses have been known to ally
with flumphs (see the Monster Manual) and planar
beings such as demons, shifting their worldview and
alignment to match those of their new masters.
