At will: command, create or destroy water
3/day each: control water, darkness, water breathing, water walk
1/day: Evard’s black tentacles
Voice of the Kraken (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). A
kraken speaks through the priest with a thunderous voice au­
dible within 300 feet. Creatures of the priest’s choice that can
hear the kraken’s words (which are spoken in Abyssal, Infernal,
or Primordial) must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw
or be frightened of the priest for 1 minute. A frightened target
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, end­
ing the effect on itself on a success.
--col--
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY

=== PAGE 168 ===
Kruthiks
Kruthiks are chitin-covered reptiles that hunt in
packs and nest in sprawling subterranean war­
rens. They are attracted to sources of heat, such as
dwarven forges and pools of molten lava, and carve
out lairs as close to such locations as possible. As
they burrow through the earth, they leave behind
tunnels—evidence that is often the first clue to the
nearby presence of a kruthik hive. Kruthiks also
make use of preexisting underground chambers, in­
corporating them into their lairs when they can.
Kruthiks communicate with one another
through a series of hisses and chittering noises.
These sounds can often be heard in advance of
a kruthik attack. Whenever their lair is invaded,
kruthik guards send out an alarm by rapidly
tapping the stone floor with their sharp legs.
In addition to having an acute sense of
smell, kruthiks can see in the dark and can
detect vibrations in the earth around them.
They take the scent of their own dead as a
warning and avoid areas where many other kruth­
iks have died. Slaying a sufficient number of kruth­
iks in one area might cause the remaining hive
members to move elsewhere.
Although they can feed on carrion, kruthiks pre­
fer live prey. They kill enemies by impaling them
on their spiked limbs, then grind up the flesh and
bones with mandibles strong enough to chew rock.
When several kruthiks gang up on a single foe, they
become frenzied and even more lethal.
Kruthiks abide the presence of Constructs, El-
ementals, Oozes, and Undead, and they use such
creatures to help guard their hive. They are smart
enough to barricade some tunnels and dig new ones
that keep their neighbors away from their eggs.
Young Kruthik
Kruthiks hatch from eggs laid by female adults.
Each egg is about the size of an adult human’s head
and hatches within a month. Tiny kruthik hatch­
lings are harmless and rarely stray far from the
nest. They feed primarily on offal and one another.
Within a month, the survivors become young kruth­
iks large enough to hunt and defend themselves.
jgg CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Young Kruthik
Small Monstrosity, Unaligned
Armor Class 16 (natural armor)
Hit Points 9 (2d6 + 2)
Speed 30 ft., burrow 10 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
13 (+1) 16 (+3) 13 (+1) 4 (-3) 10 (+0) 6 (-2)
Skills Perception +4
Senses darkvision 30 ft., tremorsense 60 ft.,
passive Perception 14
Languages Kruthik
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Pack Tactics. The kruthik has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the kruthik’s allies is within
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated.
Tunneler. The kruthik can burrow through solid rock at half
its burrowing speed and leaves a 2V2-foot-diameter tunnel
in its wake.
Actions______________________________
Stab. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage.

=== PAGE 169 ===
Adult Kruthik
Medium Monstrosity, Unaligned
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 20 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 7 H) 12 (+1) 8(-l)
Skills Perception +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft.,
passive Perception 15
Languages Kruthik
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Pack Tactics. The kruthik has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the kruthik’s allies is within
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated.
Tunneler. The kruthik can burrow through solid rock at half
its burrowing speed and leaves a 5-foot-diameter tunnel
in its wake.
Actions
Multiattack. The kruthik makes two Stab or Spike attacks.
Stab. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 6 (1 d6 + 3) piercing damage.
Spike. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 20/60 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (1 d4 + 3) piercing damage.
--col--
Adult Kruthik
It takes six months of steady eating for a young
kruthik to reach adult size. The natural life span of
an adult kruthik is roughly seven years.
Adult kruthiks grow spiky protrusions on their
legs and can fling these dagger-sized spikes at ene­
mies beyond the reach of their claws.
Kruthik Hive Lord
A hive lord rules each kruthik hive. When the hive
lord dies, the surviving members of the hive aban­
don their lair and search for a new one. When a
suitable location is found, the largest kruthik in the
hive undergoes a metamorphosis, forming a cocoon
around itself and emerging several weeks later as
a hive lord—a bigger and smarter kruthik with the
ability to spray digestive acid from its maw. The
hive lord claims the largest chamber of the lair and
keeps several adult kruthiks nearby as bodyguards.
Kruthik Hive Lord
Large Monstrosity, Unaligned
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 102 (12dl0 + 36)
Speed 40 ft., burrow 20 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 16 (+3) 17 (+3) 10 (+0) 14 (+2) 10 (+0)
Skills Perception +8
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft.,
passive Perception 18
Languages Kruthik
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Pack Tactics. The kruthik has advantage on an attack roll
against a creature if at least one of the kruthik’s allies is within
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated.
Tunneler. The kruthik can burrow through solid rock at half
its burrowing speed and leaves a 10-foot-diameter tunnel
in its wake.
Actions
Multiattack. The kruthik makes two Stab or Spike attacks.
Stab. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (IdlO + 4) piercing damage.
Spike. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (1 d6 + 4) piercing damage.
Acid Spray (Recharge 5-6). The kruthik sprays acid in a 15-foot
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 14 Dexterity
saving throw, taking 22 (4dl0) acid damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY

=== PAGE 170 ===
L
eucrotta
A leucrotta is what you would get if you took
the head of a giant badger, the legs of a
deer, and the body of a large hyena, then
put them together and reanimated them
with demon ichor without bothering to
cover up the stink of death.
The first leucrottas came into be
ing alongside some gnolls during
the rampages of Yeenoghu
(appears in this book) on the
Material Plane. While many of
the hyenas that ate Yeenoghu’s
kills transformed into gnolls,
others underwent more bi­
zarre changes; leucrottas were
the most numerous of these.
As clever as it is cruel, a
leucrotta loves to deceive, torture, and kill. Crea­
tures who venerate Yeenoghu—particularly his
gnoll followers—view leucrottas with great respect.
Although a leucrotta is unlikely to lead a gnoll war
band, it can influence the leader and might agree to
carry the leader into battle and offer advice during
the fight. Followers of Yeenoghu also see leucrottas
as a form of entertainment. They enjoy watching a
leucrotta work almost as much as they like doing
their own killing, since leucrottas are meticulous in
their cruelty and able to draw out kills for better and
longer sport. And when there are no victims to be
had, a leucrotta can mimic the delightful squeals of
a suffering victim.
A leucrotta is so loathsome that few outside of
its own kind can stand to be around one for long.
Its horrific, hodgepodge body oozes a foul stench.
This reek is outdone only by the creature’s breath,
which issues from a maw that drips fluid corrupted
with rot and digestive juices. In place of fangs, a
leucrotta has bony ridges as hard as steel that can
crush bones and lacerate flesh. These plates are so
tough that a leucrotta can use them to peel plate ar­
mor away from the body of a slain knight.
A leucrotta’s stench would normally warn away
prey long before the creature could attack. It has
two natural capabilities, however, that give it an
advantage. First, a leucrotta’s tracks are nearly
impossible to distinguish from those of common
deer. Second, it can duplicate the call or the vocal
expressions of just about any creature it has heard.
The monster uses its mimicry to lure in potential
victims, then attacks while they are confused or un­
aware of the actual threat.
170 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Leucrotta
Large Monstrosity, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 67 (9dl0+ 18)
Speed 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 14 (+2) 15 (+2) 9 (-1) 12 (+1) 6 (-2)
Skills Deception +2, Perception +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Abyssal, Gnoll
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Mimicry. The leucrotta can mimic Beast sounds and Humanoid
voices. A creature that hears the sounds can tell they are imita­
tions only with a successful DC 14 Wisdom (Insight) check.
Stench. Any creature other than a leucrotta or gnoll that starts
its turn within 5 feet of the leucrotta must succeed on a DC 12
Constitution saving throw or be poisoned until the start of the
creature’s next turn. On a successful saving throw, the creature
is immune to the Stench of all leucrottas for 1 hour.
Actions
Multiattack. The leucrotta makes one Bite attack and one
Hooves attack.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (1 d8 + 4) piercing damage. If the leucrotta scores a criti­
cal hit, it rolls the damage dice three times, instead of twice.
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.
Bonus Actions
Kicking Retreat. Immediately after the leucrotta makes a
Hooves attack, it takes the Disengage action.

=== PAGE 171 ===
Leviathan
A leviathan is an immense creature that acts as a
force of nature, dragging ships down to the ocean’s
depths and washing away coastal settlements.
When called forth, a leviathan arises from a large
body of water and takes on the form of a gigan­
tic serpent.
Usually found only on the Elemental Plane of
Water, a leviathan sometimes swims through a por­
tal to another world, where tritons, sea elves, and
other aquatic folk attempt to contain it. Nihilistic
cults have also been known to perform arduous
rituals to summon a leviathan to a world, with the
aim of using the creature to destroy coastal commu­
nities. Those cultists often consider it a blessing to
drown themselves in the elemental’s waters.
Leviathan
Gargantuan Elemental, Typically Neutral
Armor Class 17
Hit Points 328 (16d20+ 160)
Speed 40 ft., swim 120 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
27 (+8) 24 (+7) 30 (+10) 2 (-4) 18 (4-4) 17 (4-3)
Saving Throws Wis 4-10, Cha 4-9
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities acid, poison
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed,
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, stunned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 20 (25,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus 4-6
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the leviathan fails a saving
throw, it can choose to succeed instead.
Partial Freeze. If the leviathan takes 50 cold damage or more
during a single turn, the leviathan partially freezes; until the
end of its next turn, its speeds are reduced to 20 feet, and it
makes attack rolls with disadvantage.
Siege Monster. The leviathan deals double damage to objects
and structures.
Water Form. The leviathan can enter a hostile creature’s space
and stop there. It can move through a space as narrow as 1
inch wide without squeezing.
--col--
Actions
Multiattack. The leviathan makes one Slam attack and one
Tail attack.
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: 4-14 to hit, reach 20 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 21 (2dl2 4- 8) bludgeoning damage plus 13 (2dl2)
acid damage.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: 4-14 to hit, reach 20 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 19 (2dl0 4- 8) bludgeoning damage plus 10 (3d6)
acid damage.
Tidal Wave (Recharge 6). The leviathan magically creates a
wave of water that extends from a point it can see within 120
feet of itself. The wave is up to 250 feet long, up to 250 feet tall,
and up to 50 feet wide. Each creature in the wave must make a
DC 24 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes
45 (7dl2) bludgeoning damage and is knocked prone. On a
successful save, a creature takes half as much damage and isn’t
knocked prone. The water spreads out across the ground in all
directions, extinguishing unprotected flames in its area and
within 250 feet of it, and then it vanishes.
Legendary Actions
The leviathan can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The le­
viathan regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.
Move. The leviathan moves up to its speed.
Slam (Costs 2 Actions). The leviathan makes one Slam attack.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY

=== PAGE 172 ===
11 (+0) 17 (+3) 13 (+1) 11 (+0) 16 (+3) 10 (+0)
Skills Acrobatics +5, Insight +5, Stealth +5
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages any one language (usually Common)
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Unarmored Defense. While the adept is wearing no armor and
wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom modifier.
Actions
Multiattack. The adept makes three Unarmed Strike attacks or
five Dart attacks.
Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) bludgeoning damage. Once per
turn, the adept can cause one of the following additional effects
(choose one or roll a d4):
1-2: Knock Down. The target must succeed on a DC 13 Dexter­
ity saving throw or be knocked prone.
3-4: Push. The target must succeed on a DC 13 Strength
saving throw or be pushed up to 10 feet directly away from
the adept.
Dart. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 20/60 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 5 (1 d4 + 3) piercing damage.
Reactions
Deflect Missile. In response to being hit by a ranged weapon
attack, the adept deflects the missile. The damage it takes from
the attack is reduced by IdlO + 3. Ifthe damage is reduced to 0,
the adept catches the missile if it’s small enough to hold in one
hand and the adept has a hand free.
172 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Martial Arts Adept
Martial arts adepts are disciplined monks with
extensive training in hand-to-hand combat. Some
protect monasteries; others travel the world seeking
enlightenment or new forms of combat to master. A
few become bodyguards, trading their combat prow­
ess and loyalty for food and lodging.
Some martial artists adorn themselves with
tattoos to honor inspirations or instructors, or to
memorialize profound lessons, triumphs, or defeats.
You may roll on the Martial Arts Adept Tattoos table
to determine what sort of tattoo an adept bears.
Martial Arts Adept Tattoos
d8 Tattoo
1 Patterning on the arms that make them look as
though they were made of marble or granite
2 Colorful dragon scales
3 Collage of playful Elemental or Fey creatures
4 Constellations on the palm of each hand
5 Passage from a fighting manual
6 Beautiful but poisonous flowers
7 Two couatls swirling around each other, ren­
dered in metallic ink
8 Detailed landscape depicting natural beauty

=== PAGE 173 ===
Marut
Large Construct (Inevitable), Typically Lawful Neutral
Armor Class 22 (natural armor)
Hit Points 432 (32dl0 + 256)
Speed 40 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
28 (+9) 12 (+1) 26 (+8) 19 (+4) 15 (+2) 18 (+4)
Saving Throws Int +12, Wis +10, Cha +12
Skills Insight +10, Intimidation +12, Perception +10
Damage Resistances thunder; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed,
poisoned, unconscious
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 20
Languages all but rarely speaks
Challenge 25 (75,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +8
Immutable Form. The marut is immune to any spell or effect
that would alter its form.
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the marut fails a saving throw,
it can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. The marut has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Unusual Nature. The marut doesn’t require air, food,
drink, or sleep.
Actions
Multiattack. The marut makes two Unerring Slam attacks.
Unerring Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: automatic hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 60 force damage, and the target is pushed up
to 5 feet away from the marut if it is Huge or smaller.
Blazing Edict (Recharge 5-6). Arcane energy emanates from
the marut's chest in a 60-foot cube. Every creature in that area
takes 45 radiant damage. Each creature that takes any of this
damage must succeed on a DC 20 Wisdom saving throw or be
stunned until the end of the marut’s next turn.
Plane Shift (3/Day). The marut casts plane shift, requiring no
material components and using Intelligence as the spellcasting
ability. The marut can cast the spell normally, or it can cast the
spell on an unwilling creature it can see within 60 feet of it. If it
uses the latter option, the targeted creature must succeed on a
DC 20 Charisma saving throw or be banished to a teleportation
circle in the Hall of Concordance in Sigil.
--col--
Marut
The nigh-unstoppable inevitables serve a singular
purpose: they enforce contracts forged in the Hall
of Concordance in the city of Sigil. Primus, the
leader of the modrons, created maruts and other in­
evitables to bring order to dealings between planar
folk. A wide array of disparate creatures, including
yugoloths, will enter into a contract with inevita­
bles if asked.
The Hall of Concordance is an embassy of pure
law in Sigil, the City of Doors. In the hall, parties
who agree to mutual terms—and who pay the requi­
site gold to the Kolyarut, a mechanical engine of ab­
solute jurisprudence—can have their contract chis­
eled onto a sheet of gold that is placed in the chest of
a marut. From that moment until the contract is ful­
filled, the marut is bound to enforce its terms and to
punish any party who breaks them. A marut resorts
to lethal force only if a contract calls for it, if the con­
tract is fully broken, or if the marut is attacked.
Inevitables care nothing for the spirit of an
agreement, only the letter. A marut enforces what
is written, not what was meant by or supposed to
be understood from the writing. The Kolyarut re­
jects contracts that contain vague, contradictory,
or unenforceable terms. Beyond that, it doesn't
care whether both parties understand what they're
agreeing to.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 173

=== PAGE 174 ===
Master Thief
1 Medium Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 16 (studded leather)
Hit Points 84 (13d8 + 26)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
11 (+0) 18 (+4) 14 (+2) 11 (+0) 11 (+0) 12 (+1)
Saving Throws Dex +7, I nt +3
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +3, Perception +3, Sleight of
Hand +7, Stealth +7
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages any one language (usually Common) plus
thieves’ cant
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Evasion. If the thief is subjected to an effect that allows it to
make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, the
thief instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving
throw and only half damage if it fails, provided the thief isn’t
incapacitated.
Actions
Multiattack. The thief makes three Shortsword or Short­
bow attacks.
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 7 (1 d6 + 4) piercing damage plus 3 (1 d6) poi­
son damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 80/320 ft.,
one target. Hit: 7 (ld6 + 4) piercing damage plus 3 (1 d6) poi­
son damage.
Bonus Actions
Cunning Action. The thief takes the Dash, Disengage, or
Hide action.
Reactions
Uncanny Dodge. The thief halves the damage that it takes from
an attack that hits it. The thief must be able to see the attacker.
174 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Master Thief
Master thieves are known for perpetrating daring
heists. They tend to develop a romanticized repu­
tation. A master thief might “retire” from hands-on
work to run a thieves’ guild, spearhead some covert
enterprise, or enjoy a quiet life of luxury.
When a master thief completes a challenging
heist, they often leave behind a calling card to taunt
their victims. You may roll on the Master Thief Call­
ing Cards table to determine what a master thief
leaves behind.
Master Thief Calling Cards
diO Calling Card
1 Tiny, folded paper cat
2 Red bird feather
3 Rose petal
4 Figurine made from twigs and twine
