emerges, it gains a +4 bonus to its AC and is restrained. It can
emerge from its shell as a bonus action on its turn.
.. ........ ......

=== PAGE 127 ===
Fund
When the demon lord Yeenoghu (appears in
this book) wants to create a particularly fear­
some war band leader, he transforms an excep
tionally strong and vicious gnoll into a demonic
warrior known as a flind.
A war band of demon-worshiping gnolls typi­
cally contains only one flind, and that creature
sets the war band’s path. Because of its special con­
nection to Yeenoghu, a flind uses demonic insight to
guide the gnolls toward weak prey ripe for slaughter.
Unlike other leaders who might skulk behind their
minions, a flind leads the charge in battle. Its flail
causes wracking pain, paralysis, and disorientation
in those it strikes.
Flind
Medium Fiend (Cnoll), Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 16 (breastplate)
Hit Points 127 (15d8 + 60)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
20 (+5) 14 (+2) 19 (+4) 11 (+0) 13 (+1) 12 (+1)
Saving Throws Con +8, Wis +5
Skills Intimidate +5, Perception +5
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Cnoll, Abyssal
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Aura of Blood Thirst. If the flind isn’t incapacitated, any crea­
ture with the Rampage trait can make a Bite attack as a bonus
action while within 10 feet of the flind.
--col--
Actions
Multiattack. The flind makes one Flail of Chaos attack, one
Flail of Pain attack, and one Flail of Paralysis attack, or it makes
three Longbow attacks.
Flail of Chaos. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (IdlO + 5) bludgeoning damage, and the target
must make a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save,
the target must use its reaction, if available, to make one melee
attack against a random creature, other than the flind, within
its reach. If there’s no creature within reach, the target instead
moves half its speed in a random direction.
Flail of Pain. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 10 (IdlO + 5) bludgeoning damage plus 16 (3dl0)
psychic damage.
Flail of Paralysis. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft.,
one target. Hit: 10 (IdlO + 5) bludgeoning damage, and the
target must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or
be paralyzed until the end of its next turn.
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 150/600 ft.,
one target. Hit: 6 (1 d8 + 2) piercing damage.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 127

=== PAGE 128 ===
Fraz-Urb’luu
Fraz-Urb’luu is the Prince of Deception and Demon
Lord of Illusions. He uses every trick, every ounce
of demonic cunning, to manipulate his enemies—
mortal and Fiend alike—to do his will. Fraz-Urb’luu
can create dreamlands and mind-bending fantasies
able to deceive the most discerning foes.
Once imprisoned for centuries below Castle Grey­
hawk on the world of Oerth, Fraz-Urb’luu has slowly
rebuilt his power in the Abyss. He seeks the pieces
of the legendary staff of power taken from him by
those who imprisoned him and commands his ser­
vants to do likewise.
The Prince of Deception’s true form is like that of
a great gargoyle, some 12 feet tall, with an extended,
muscular neck; a smiling face framed by long,
pointed ears and lank, dark hair; and bat-like wings
are furled against his powerful shoulders. He can
assume other forms, however, from the hideous to
the beautiful.
i28
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Many of the cultists of Fraz-Urb’luu aren’t even
aware they serve the Prince of Deception, believing
their master is a beneficent being and granter of
wishes, some lost god or Celestial, or even another
Fiend. Fraz-Urb’luu wears all these masks and
more. He particularly delights in aiding demon-hunt­
ers against his demonic adversaries, driving the
hunters to greater and greater atrocities in the name
of their cause, only to eventually reveal his true na­
ture and claim their souls as his own.
Fraz-Urb’luu’s Lair
Fraz-Urb’luu’s lair lies within the abyssal realm of
Hollow’s Heart, a plain of white dust with few struc­
tures on it. The lair itself is the city of Zoragmelok,
a circular fortress surrounded by adamantine walls
topped with razors and hooks. Corkscrew towers
loom above twisted domes and vast amphitheaters,
forming a surreal and disorienting cityscape.
The challenge rating of Fraz-Urb’luu is 24 (62,000
XP) when he’s encountered in his lair.

=== PAGE 129 ===
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), Fraz-
Urb’luu can take one of the following lair actions
when in his lair; he can’t take the same lair action
two rounds in a row:
Conjure Walls and Doors. Fraz-Urb’luu causes
up to five doors within the lair to become walls
and an equal number of doors to appear on walls
where there previously were none.
Psychic Anguish. Fraz-Urb’luu creates a wave of
anguish. Each creature he can see within the lair
must succeed on a DC 23 Wisdom saving throw
or take 33 (6dl0) psychic damage.
Simulacrum. Fraz-Urb’luu chooses one Humanoid
within the lair and instantly creates a simulacrum
of that creature (as if created with the simulacrum
spell). This simulacrum obeys Fraz-Urb’luu’s
commands and is destroyed on the next initia­
tive count 20.
Regional Effects
The region containing Fraz-Urb’luu’s lair is warped
by his magic, creating one or more of the follow­
ing effects:
Fraz-Urb’luu
Large Fiend (Demon), Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 18 (natural armor)
Hit Points 337 (27dl0+ 189)
Speed 40 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
29 (+9) 12 (+1) 25 (+7) 26 (+8) 24 (+7) 26 (+8)
Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +14, Int +15, Wis +14
Skills Deception +15, Perception +14, Stealth +8
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing that is nonmagical
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 24
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 23 (50,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Fraz-Urb’luu fails a saving
throw, he can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Fraz-Urb’luu has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Undetectable. Fraz-Urb’luu can’t be targeted by divination
magic, perceived through magical scrying sensors, or detected
by abilities that sense demons or Fiends.
--col--
Beguiling Realm. Within 6 miles of the lair, all
Charisma (Persuasion) and Wisdom (Insight)
checks have disadvantage, and all Charisma (De­
ception) and Charisma (Performance) checks have
advantage.
Nostalgic Pangs. Sapient creatures within 1 mile
of the lair frequently see hallucinations of long-
dead friends and comrades that vanish after only a
brief glimpse.
Twisted Paths. Roads and paths within 6 miles of
the lair twist and turn back on themselves, mak­
ing navigation in the area exceedingly difficult.
If Fraz-Urb’luu dies, these effects fade over the
course of Id 10 days.
Cultists of Fraz-Urb’luu
Fraz-Urb’luu grants his cultists the Liar’s Eye trait.
Liar’s Eye. This creature has advantage on Wisdom (Insight or
Perception) checks.
As a bonus action, the creature detects the location of all illu­
sions and hidden creatures within 15 feet of it.
Actions
Multiattack. Fraz-Urb’luu makes one Bite attack and two Fist
attacks, and he uses Phantasmal Terror.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 19 (3d6 + 9) force damage.
Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 22 (3d8 + 9) force damage.
Phantasmal Terror. Fraz-Urb’luu targets one creature he can
see within 120 feet of him. The target must succeed on a DC
23 Wisdom saving throw, or it takes 16 (3dl0) psychic damage
and is frightened of Fraz-Urb’luu until the end of its next turn.
Spellcasting. Fraz-Urb’luu casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 23):
At will: alter self (can become Medium when changing his ap­
pearance), detect magic, dispel magic, phantasmal force
3/day each: mislead, programmed illusion, seeming
1/day each: modify memory, project image
Legendary Actions
Fraz-Urb’luu can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Fraz-
Urb’luu regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn.
Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 20 (2dl 0 + 9) force damage. If the target is a Large or
smaller creature, it is also grappled (escape DC 24), and it is
restrained until the grapple ends. Fraz-Urb’luu can grapple
only one creature with his tail at a time.
Terror (Costs 2 Actions). Fraz-Urb’luu uses Phantasmal Terror.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 129

=== PAGE 130 ===
Froghemoth
Huge Monstrosity, Unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 161 (14dl2 + 70)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
23 (+6) 13 (+1) 20 (+5) 2 (-4) ’2 H) 5 (-3)
Saving Throws Con +9, Wis +5
Skills Perception +9, Stealth +5
Damage Resistances fire, lightning
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 19
Languages —
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Amphibious. The froghemoth can breathe air and water.
Shock Susceptibility. If the froghemoth takes lightning damage
it suffers two effects until the end of its next turn: its speed is
halved, and it has disadvantage on Dexterity saving throws.
Actions________________________________
Multiattack. The froghemoth makes one Bite attack and two
Tentacle attacks, and it can use Tongue.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 22 (3dl0 + 6) piercing damage, and the target is swallowe
if it is a Medium or smaller creature. A swallowed creature is
blinded and restrained, has total cover against attacks and
other effects outside the froghemoth, and takes 10 (3d6) acid
damage at the start of each of the froghemoth’s turns.
The froghemoth’s gullet can hold up to two creatures at a
time. If the froghemoth takes 20 damage or more on a single
turn from a creature inside it, the froghemoth must succeed o
a DC 20 Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or re
gurgitate all swallowed creatures, each ofwhich falls prone in
space within 10 feet of the froghemoth. If the froghemoth dies
any swallowed creature is no longer restrained by it and can es
cape from the corpse using 10 feet of movement, exiting prone
Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 20 ft., one
target. Hit: 19 (3d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 16) if it is a Huge or smaller creature. Un
til the grapple ends, the froghemoth can’t use this tentacle on
another target. The froghemoth has four tentacles.
Tongue. The froghemoth targets one Medium or smaller
creature that it can see within 20 feet of it. The target must
make a DC 18 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the
target is pulled into an unoccupied space within 5 feet of the
froghemoth.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Froghemoth
A froghemoth is an amphibious predator as big as
an elephant. It lairs in swamps and has four tenta­
cles, a thick rubbery hide, a fang-filled maw with a
prehensile tongue, and an extendable stalk sporting
three bulbous eyes that face in different directions.
Froghemoths are creatures not of this world. A
journal purportedly written long ago by the wizard
Lum describes strange, cylindrical chambers of
e,
metal buried in the ground from which froghemoths
emerged, but no reliable reports of the location of
such places exist.
__ Every few years, a froghemoth can lay a fer­
tile egg without mating. The froghemoth cares
nothing for its egg and might eat the hatchling. A
young froghemoth’s survival thus depends on its
ed parent leaving it behind in indifference. A new­
born froghemoth grows to full size over a period
of months by indiscriminately preying on other
creatures in its swampy domain. It learns to hide
its enormous body in murky pools, keeping only its
eyestalk above water to watch for passing creatures.
When food comes within reach, the froghemoth
on
e­ erupts from its pool, tentacles and tongue flailing. It
a can grab several targets at once; it wraps its tongue
s, around one and pulls it in to be devoured while hold­
s­ ing the rest at bay.
e.
If bullywugs (see the Monster Manual) come
across a froghemoth, the bullywugs may treat the
s froghemoth as a god and do all they can to coax the
n­
monster into their den. A froghemoth can be tamed
(after a fashion) by offering it food, and bullywugs
can communicate with it on a basic level, so the
creature might eat only a few bullywugs before
following the rest. The bullywugs gather food as
tribute for it, provide it with a comfortable lair, pro­
tect it from harm, and try to ensure that any of its
offspring reach maturity.

=== PAGE 131 ===
Frost Giant
Everlasting One
To hold its place or rise within the ordning, a frost
giant must routinely face mighty foes in single com­
bat. Some seek out magic that will aid them, but en­
chanted objects can be taken or lost. True greatness
relies on personal prowess. Faced with this truth, a
frost giant might seek a supernatural gift from Va-
prak the Destroyer.
Vaprak is a ferocious god of strength and hunger
also worshiped by some ogres and trolls. He likes to
tempt frost giants with dreams of glory followed by
nightmares of bloody cannibalism. Those who don’t
shrink from such visions or report them to priests
of Thrym receive more of the same. If a frost giant
comes to relish these dreams and nightmares, as
some do, Vaprak sets a troll upon a sacred quest to
find the frost giant and meet the giant in secret. The
troll offers up its own body to be devoured in Va-
prak’s name. Only the boldest and most determined
frost giants can finish such a gory feast.
After devouring the troll sent by Vaprak, bones
and all, a frost giant becomes an everlasting one,
gaining tremendous strength, an ill temper, and a
troll’s regenerative ability. With these gifts, the frost
giant can swiftly claim the title of jarl and easily
fend off rivals for decades. However, if the frost
--col--
giant doesn’t give enough honor to Vaprak or fails
to heed Vaprak’s visions, injuries the frost giant sus­
tains heal wrong, resulting in discolored skin; warty
scars; and vestigial body parts, such as extra digits,
limbs, and even heads. The touch of Vaprak can no
longer be hidden then, and the everlasting one is ei­
ther killed or exiled by their clan. Sometimes small
communities of everlasting ones gather and even
reproduce, passing the “blessing” and worship of
Vaprak from one generation to the next.
- • ■ ■ ■ - -»■'—■ " ■ ■ . •■■ ■ ■ .................... „ I
Frost Giant Everlasting One
Huge Giant, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 15 (patchwork armor)
Hit Points 189 (14dl2 + 98)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
25 (+7) 9 (-1) 24 (+7) 9 (-1) 10 (+0) 12 (+1)
Saving Throws Str +11, Con +11, Wis +4,
Skills Athletics +11, Perception +4
Damage Immunities cold
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Giant
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Extra Heads. The giant has a 25 percent chance of having
more than one head. If it has more than one, it has advantage
on Wisdom (Perception) checks and on saving throws against
being blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, stunned, or
knocked unconscious.
Regeneration. The giant regains 10 hit points at the start of its
turn. If the giant takes acid or fire damage, this trait doesn’t
function at the start of its next turn. The giant dies only if it
starts its turn with 0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate.
Actions
Multiattack. The giant makes two Greataxe or Rock attacks.
Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
target. Hit: 26 (3dl2 + 7) slashing damage, or 30 (3dl2 + 11)
slashing damage while raging.
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one
target. Hit: 29 (4dl0 + 7) bludgeoning damage.
Bonus Action
Vaprak’s Rage (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The
giant enters a rage. The rage lasts for 1 minute or until the
giant is incapacitated. While raging, the giant gains the follow­
ing benefits:
• The giant has advantage on Strength checks and Strength
saving throws.
• When it makes a melee weapon attack, the giant gains a +4
bonus to the damage roll.
• The giant has resistance to bludgeoning, piercing, and slash­
ing damage.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 131

=== PAGE 132 ===
Frost Salamander
Frost salamanders are natives of the Plane of Ice,
also called the Frostfell, which rests between the
Plane of Air and the Plane of Water. Frost salaman­
ders especially like to hunt warm-blooded creatures.
They sometimes travel to frigid climes on the Mate­
rial Plane by wandering through planar gates.
Frost salamanders’ aggressive appetite for any
heat source leads them to attack expeditions and
settlements that other predators would avoid, as
they often mistake the fire of a forge or a campfire
for a large, tasty meal. Azers (see the Monster Man­
ual) use this predilection to hunt frost salamanders.
Venturing into the Frostfell, they use large fires to
lure these creatures into traps, then kill them and
collect their hides and fangs for use in crafting
weapons and armor.
Although frost salamanders can burrow their way
through loose soil, they prefer to dig into ice. They
roll around in piles of broken chunks of ice, allow­
ing it to scratch their backs as they grind it down.
This habit leads them to create extensive networks
of ice caves, which become ever larger as they claw
fresh chunks of ice from the walls of their lairs.
A frost salamander that dwells in a lair for a while
carves out enough space to allow a small army to
camp within. Inexperienced travelers who come
across these caves see them as a welcome shelter,
though they are anything but. Frost salamanders
greedily devour any prey foolhardy enough to try
sleeping in their lairs.
On rare occasions, frost giants (see the Monster
Manual) capture and tame these creatures, using
them to burrow into the ice to help create outposts
and fortresses.
132 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Frost Salamander
Huge Elemental, Unaligned
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 168 (16dl2 + 64)
Speed 60 ft., burrow 40 ft., climb 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
20 (+5) 12 (+1) 18 (+4) 7 (-2) 11 (+0) 7 (-2)
Saving Throws Con +8, Wis +4
Skills Perception +4
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Immunities cold
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Primordial
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Burning Fury. When the salamander takes fire damage, its
Freezing Breath automatically recharges.
Actions
Multiattack. The salamander makes one Bite attack and four
Claw attacks.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (ld8 + 5) piercing damage plus 5 (IdlO) cold damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 8 (1 d6 + 5) piercing damage.
Freezing Breath (Recharge 6). The salamander exhales chill
wind in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a
DC 17 Constitution saving throw, taking 44 (8dl0) cold damage
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
* * ■■■ ■■ --------. -

=== PAGE 133 ===
Gauth
Medium Aberration (Beholder), Typically Lawful Evil
Armor Class 15 (natural armor)
Hit Points 52 (7d8 + 21)
Speed 0 ft., fly 20 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
10 (+0) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 15 (+2) 13 (+1)
Saving Throws Int +5, Wis +5, Cha +4
Skills Perception +5
Condition Immunities prone
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15
Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Stunning Gaze. When a creature that can see the gauth’s cen­
tral eye starts its turn within 30 feet of the gauth, the gauth can
force it to make a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw if the gauth isn’t
incapacitated and can see the creature. A creature that fails the
save is stunned until the start of its next turn.
Unless surprised, a creature can avert its eyes at the start
of its turn to avoid the saving throw. If the creature does so, it
can’t see the gauth until the start of its next turn, when it can
avert its eyes again. If the creature looks at the gauth in the
meantime, it must immediately make the save.
Death Throes. When the gauth dies, the magical energy within
it explodes, and each creature within 10 feet of it must make a
DC 14 Dexterity saving throw, taking 13 (3d8) force damage on
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 9 (2d8) piercing damage.
Eye Rays. The gauth shoots three of the following magical eye
rays at random (roll three d6s, and reroll duplicates), targeting
one to three creatures it can see within 120 feet of it:
1: Devour Magic Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 14
Dexterity saving throw or have one of its magic items lose all
magical properties until the start of the gauth’s next turn. If
the object is a charged item, it also loses 1 d4 charges. Deter­
mine the affected item randomly, ignoring single-use items
such as potions and scrolls.
2: Enervation Ray. The target must make a DC 14 Constitution
saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) necrotic damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
3: Fire Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 14 Dexterity sav­
ing throw or take 22 (4dl0) fire damage.
4: Paralyzing Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 14 Consti­
tution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The target
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns,
ending the effect on itself on a success.
5: Pushing Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 14 Strength
saving throw or be pushed up to 15 feet away from the gauth
and have its speed halved until the start of the gauth’s
next turn.
6: Sleep Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom
saving throw or fall asleep and remain unconscious for 1
minute. The target awakens if it takes damage or another
creature takes an action to wake it. This ray has no effect on
Constructs and Undead.
