damage, if it is incapacitated, or if its speed becomes 0.
■ ■ .L" . ' " ------ - —
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 263

=== PAGE 264 ===
Necromancer Wizard
Medium Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor)
Hit Points 110 (20d8 + 20)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
9 (-1) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 17 (+3) 12 (+1) 11 (+0)
Saving Throws I nt +7, Wis +5
Skills Arcana +7, History +7
Damage Resistances necrotic
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages any four languages
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Actions
Multiattack. The necromancer makes three Arcane
Burst attacks.
..... .. .. ...... --.z
264. CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Arcane Burst. Melee or Ranged Spell Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft.
or range 120 ft., one target. Hit: 25 (4dl0 + 3) necrotic damage.
Spellcasting. The necromancer casts one of the following
spells, using Intelligence as the spellcasting ability (spell
save DC 15):
At will: dancing lights, mage hand, prestidigitation
2/day each: bestow curse, dimension door, mage armor, web
1/day: circle of death
Bonus Actions
Summon Undead (1/Day). The necromancer magically sum­
mons five skeletons or zombies (both appear in the Monster
Manual). The summoned creatures appear in unoccupied
spaces within 60 feet of the necromancer, whom they obey.
They take their turns immediately after the necromancer. Each
lasts for 1 hour, until it or the necromancer dies, or until the
necromancer dismisses it as a bonus action.
Reactions
Crim Harvest. When the necromancer kills a creature with ne­
crotic damage, the necromancer regains 9 (2d8) hit points.

=== PAGE 265 ===
Transmitter Wizard
Medium Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor)
Hit Points 49 (lld8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
9(-l) 14 (+2) 11 (+0) 17 (+3) 12 (+1) 11 (+0)
Saving Throws Int +6, Wis +4
Skills Arcana +6, History +6
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages any four languages
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Transmuter’s Stone. The transmuter carries a magic stone it
crafted. The stone grants it one of the following benefits while
bearing the stone; the transmuter chooses the benefit at the
end of each long rest:
Darkvision. The transmuter has darkvision out to a range
of 60 feet.
--col--
. . ............ 1 ------------.......................
Resilience. The transmuter has proficiency in Constitution sav­
ing throws.
Resistance. The transmuter has resistance to acid, cold, fire,
lightning, or thunder damage (transmuter’s choice whenever
choosing this benefit).
Speed. The transmuter’s walking speed is increased by 10 feet.
Actions
Multiattack. The transmuter makes three Arcane Burst attacks.
Arcane Burst. Melee or Ranged Spell Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft.
or range 120 ft., one target. Hit: 19 (3dl0 + 3) acid damage.
Spellcasting. The transmuter casts one of the following spells,
using Intelligence as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 14):
At will: light, message, prestidigitation
2/day each: fireball, hold person, knock, mage armor, poly­
morph, slow
1/day: telekinesis
Bonus Actions
Transmute (Recharge 4-6). The transmuter casts alter self or
changes the benefit of Transmuter’s Stone if bearing the stone.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 265

=== PAGE 266 ===
Medium Plant, Typically Lawful Neutral
Armor Class 18 (natural armor, shield)
Hit Points 75 (10d8 + 30)
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 12 (+1) 16 (+3) 10 (+0) 13 (+1) 8(-l)
Skills Athletics +7, Perception +4, Stealth +4
Damage Vulnerabilities fire
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages Sylvan
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Proficiency Bonus +3
Plant Camouflage. The wood woad has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks it makes in any terrain with ample obscuring
vegetation.
Regeneration. The wood woad regains 10 hit points at the start
of its turn if it is in contact with the ground. If the wood woad
takes fire damage, this trait doesn’t function at the start of the
wood woad’s next turn. The wood woad dies only if it starts its
turn with 0 hit points and doesn't regenerate.
Tree Stride. Once on each of its turns, the wood woad can use
10 feet of its movement to step magically into one living tree
within 5 feet of it and emerge from a second living tree within
60 feet of it that it can see, appearing in an unoccupied space
within 5 feet of the second tree. Both trees must be Large
or bigger.
Actions
Multiattack. The wood woad makes two Club attacks.
Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 14 (4d4 + 4) force damage.
266 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Wood Woad
A wood woad is a powerful bipedal Plant invested
with the soul of someone who gave up life to be­
come an everlasting guardian.
The ritual to create a wood woad is a prime­
val secret passed down through generations of
forest-dwelling societies and druid circles. Perform­
ing the ritual isn’t necessarily an evil act if the vic­
tim-to-be is a willing sacrifice.
In the ritual, a living person’s chest is pierced and
the heart removed. A seed is pushed into the heart,
which is then placed in a tree. Any hollow or crook
will do, but often a special cavity is carved out of
the trunk. The tree is bathed and watered with the
blood of the sacrificed victim, and the body is buried
among the tree’s roots. After three days, a sprout
emerges from the ground at the base of the tree and
swiftly grows into a bipedal form.
This new body, armored in tough bark and bear­
ing a gnarled club and shield, is at once ready to per­
form its duty. The one who performed the ritual sets
the wood woad to its task, and the creature follows
those orders unceasingly.
A wood woad has a hole where its heart would be,
just as does the body of its former self, buried in the
earth. Those who become wood woads trade their
free will and all sense of sentiment for supernatural
strength and a deathless duty. They exist only to
protect woodlands and the people who tend them. A
wood woad’s face is void and expressionless, except
for the motes of light that swim about in its eye sock­
ets. Wood woads speak little, and when not called
on to take action, they root themselves in the earth
and silently take sustenance from it.
Like trees, wood woads need only sunlight, air,
and nutrients from the earth to go on living. Be­
cause they are undying, some wood woads outlive
their original purpose. The site a wood woad guards
might lose its power or significance over time, or
those whom it was assigned to guard might die. If it
is freed from its specific duties, a wood woad might
roam to find another place of natural beauty or fey
influence to watch over.
Wood woads are drawn to creatures that have
close ties to nature and that protect and respect the
land, such as druids and treants (both appear in the
Monster Manual). Some treants have wood woad
servants by virtue of age-old pacts with druids or
Fey that performed the rituals, while others acquire
the services of freed wood woads that find renewed
purpose in serving a kindred guardian.

=== PAGE 267 ===
XVARTS
Xvarts are cowardly, greedy creatures spawned by
a renegade demigod, Raxivort. They have blue skin,
orange eyes, and receding hairlines, mirroring their
creator’s appearance. They stand about 3 feet tall.
Raxivort spent centuries watching over the trea­
sury of Graz’zt (appears in this book), and in time,
Raxivort plundered his lord’s vault. One of the trea­
sures he stole was the Infinity Spindle, a crystalline
shard that could transform even a creature as lowly
as Raxivort into a demigod. After his apotheosis,
Raxivort forged the Black Sewers, a realm within
Pandemonium that he filled with his beloved crea­
tures, rats and bats, which xvarts befriend to this
day. He enjoyed his reign only briefly before Graz’zt
unleashed his vengeance. The demon prince urged
villains far and wide to pursue the Infinity Spindle
for themselves and destroy Raxivort.
XVART
Fleeing his pursuers, Raxivort wandered across the
multiverse and spawned xvarts, who not only look
like him but also cause any magic that could reveal
his location to point to the nearest xvart instead.
Xvart Warlock of Raxivort
Some xvarts are spawned with a trace of Raxivort’s
divine energy. These xvarts usually form a pact with
him and wield magic in his service as warlocks.
Xvart
Small Monstrosity, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 13 (leather armor)
Hit Points 7 (2d6)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
8 (-1) 14 (+2) 10 (+0) 8 (-1) 7 (-2) 7 (-2)
Skills Stealth +4
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages Abyssal
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Raxivort’s Tongue. The xvart can communicate with ordinary
bats and rats, as well as giant bats and giant rats.
SRETTIHW
DRAHCIR
Actions________________________________
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) piercing damage. If at least one of the
xvart’s allies is within 5 feet of the target, the xvart can push the
target 5 feet if the target is a Medium or smaller creature.
Sling. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1 d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage.
Bonus Actions
Low Cunning. The xvart takes the Disengage action.
--col--
Xvart Warlock of Raxivort
Small Monstrosity, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor)
Hit Points 22 (5d6 + 5)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
8 (-1) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 8 (-1) 11 (+0) 12(4-1)
Skills Stealth +3
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Abyssal
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Raxivort's Blessing. When the xvart reduces an enemy to 0 hit
points, the xvart gains 4 temporary hit points.
Raxivort’s Tongue. The xvart can communicate with ordinary
bats and rats, as well as giant bats and giant rats.
Actions
Multiattack. The xvart makes two Scimitar or Raxivort’s
Bite attacks.
Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar­
get. Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) slashing damage.
Raxivort’s Bite. Ranged Spell Attack: +3 to hit, range 30 ft., one
creature. Hit: 7 (IdlO + 2) poison damage.
Spellcasting. The xvart casts one of the following spells, requir­
ing no material components and using Charisma as the spell­
casting ability (spell save DC 11):
At will: detect magic, mage armor (self only), mage hand, minor
illusion, prestidigitation
1/day each: burning hands, invisibility
Bonus Actions
Low Cunning. The xvart takes the Disengage action.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 267

=== PAGE 268 ===
Large Fiend (Yugoloth), Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 17 (natural armor)
Hit Points 147 (14dl0 + 70)
Speed 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
19 (+4) 14 (+2) 21 (+5) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 18 (+4)
Saving Throws Dex +6, Int +7, Wis +6, Cha +8
Skills Deception +8, Insight +6, Perception +6, Persuasion +8
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities acid, poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft.,
passive Perception 16
Languages Abyssal, Infernal, telepathy 60 ft.
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Magic Resistance. The yagnoloth has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. The yagnoloth makes one Electrified Touch attack
and one Massive Arm attack, or it makes one Massive Arm at­
tack and uses Battlefield Cunning, if available, or Teleport.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Y
agnoloth
Anyone who would contract yugoloths for a task
usually ends up dealing with a yagnoloth. Cunning
negotiators, these strange Fiends handle the writing
of contracts for their fellow yugoloths. Once a yagno­
loth is hired, it communicates its employer’s desires
to the yugoloths it commands.
Although they are entrusted with leading lesser
yugoloths, yagnoloths ultimately take their orders
from arcanaloths and ultroloths. Aside from their
superiors, yagnoloths have full authority over and
expect obedience from the yugoloths under their
command. Yagnoloths follow the dictates of the con­
tracts they negotiate but always include a loophole
to escape their obligations if the situation warrants.
A yagnoloth has one arm of human size and one
giant-sized arm. During negotiations, the yagnoloth
uses its human-sized arm to draft and sign con­
tracts. When a show of force is necessary or when
combat is joined, it attacks with its brutally powerful
giant arm.
Electrified Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft.,
one target. Hit: 27 (6d8) lightning damage.
Massive Arm. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 15 ft., one
target. Hit: 23 (3dl 2 + 4) force damage. If the target is a crea­
ture, it must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or
become stunned until the end of the yagnoloth's next turn.
Battlefield Cunning (Recharge 4-6). Up to two allied yugoloths
within 60 feet of the yagnoloth that can hear it can use their
reactions to make one melee attack each.
Life Leech. The yagnoloth touches one incapacitated creature
within 15 feet of it. The target takes 36 (7d8 + 4) necrotic dam­
age, and the yagnoloth gains temporary hit points equal to half
the damage dealt. The target must succeed on a DC 16 Consti­
tution saving throw, or its hit point maximum is reduced by an
amount equal to half the necrotic damage taken. This reduction
lasts until the target finishes a long rest, and the target dies if
its hit point maximum is reduced to 0.
Spellcasting. The yagnoloth casts one of the following spells,
requiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 16):
At will: darkness, detect magic, dispel magic, invisibility (self only),
suggestion
3/day: lightning bolt
Teleport. The yagnoloth teleports, along with any equipment
it is wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space
it can see.

=== PAGE 269 ===
Yeenoghu
The Beast of Butchery appears as a great scarred
gnoll, towering 14 feet tall. Yeenoghu is the Gnoll
Lord, and his creations are made in his twisted
image. When the demon lord hunted across the Ma­
terial Plane, packs of hyenas followed in his wake,
and those that ate of great Yeenoghu’s kills became
gnolls. Few others worship the Beast of Butchery,
but those who do tend to take on a gnoll-like aspect,
hunching over and filing their teeth down to points.
Yeenoghu wants nothing more than slaughter
and senseless destruction. Gnolls are his favorite
instruments, and he drives his gnoll followers to
ever-greater atrocities in his name, even imbuing
some of their commanders with his powers, which
transforms them into flinds (in this book). Yeenoghu
takes pleasure in causing fear before death, and he
sows sorrow and despair through destroying be­
loved things. He doesn’t parlay; to meet him is to do
battle with him—unless he becomes bored and wan­
ders away. The Beast of Butchery has a long rivalry
with Baphomet, the Horned King (appears in this
book), and the two demon lords and their followers
attack one another on sight.
--col--
The Gnoll Lord is covered in matted fur and leath­
ery hide, and his face resembles a grinning preda­
tor’s skull. He wields a triple-headed flail called the
Butcher, which he can summon into his hand at will,
although he is as likely to tear his prey apart with
his teeth.
Yeenoghu’s Lair
Yeenoghu’s lair in the Abyss is called the Death
Dells. Its barren hills and ravines serve as a hunting
ground, where he pursues captured mortals in a
cruel game. Yeenoghu’s lair is a place of blood and
death, populated by gnolls, hyenas, and ghouls (see
the Monster Manual), and there are few structures
or signs of civilization on his layer of the Abyss.
The challenge rating of Yeenoghu is 25 (75,000
XP) when he’s encountered in his lair.
Lair Actions
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), Yeeno­
ghu can take one of the following lair actions; he
can’t take the same lair action two rounds in a row:
Incite the Pack. Until the next initiative count 20,
all gnolls and hyenas within the lair are enraged,
causing them to have advantage on melee weapon
attack rolls and causing attack rolls to have advan­
tage against them.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 269

=== PAGE 270 ===
Iron Spike. Yeenoghu causes an iron spike—5 feet
tall and 1 inch in diameter—to burst from the
ground at a point he can see within 100 feet of
him. Any creature in the space where the spike
emerges must make a DC 24 Dexterity saving
throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 27
(6d8) piercing damage and is restrained by being
impaled on the spike. A creature can use an action
to remove itself (or a creature it can reach) from
the spike, ending the restrained condition.
Pack Rush. Each gnoll or hyena that Yeenoghu can
see can use its reaction to move up to its speed.
Regional Effects
The region containing Yeenoghu’s lair is warped
by his magic, creating one or more of the follow­
ing effects:
Savage Predators. Predatory beasts within 6 miles
of the lair become unusually savage, killing far
more than what they need for food. Carcasses
of prey are left to rot in an unnatural display of
wasteful slaughter.
. . . . . . ■——
Yeenoghu
Huge Fiend (Demon), Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 20 (natural armor)
Hit Points 333 (23dl2 + 184)
Speed 50 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
29 (+9) 16 (+3) 23 (+8) 15 (+3) 24 (+7) 15 (+2)
Saving Throws Dex +10, Con +15, Wis +14
Skills Intimidation +9, Perception +14
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing that is nonmagical
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened,
poisoned
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 24
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft.
Challenge 24 (62,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +7
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Yeenoghu fails a saving throw,
he can choose to succeed instead.
Magic Resistance. Yeenoghu has advantage on saving throws
against spells and other magical effects.
Actions
Multiattack. Yeenoghu makes three Flail attacks.
Flail. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target.
Hit: 22 (2dl2 + 9) force damage. If it’s his turn, Yeenoghu can
cause the target to suffer one of the following additional ef­
fects, each of which he can apply only once per turn:
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Spiky Terrain. Within 1 mile of the lair, large iron
spikes grow out of the ground and stone surfaces.
Yeenoghu impales the bodies of the slain on
these spikes.
If Yeenoghu dies, these effects fade over the course
of Id 10 days.
Cultists of Yeenoghu
Yeenoghu grants special abilities to his cultists. His
most devoted followers gain the Gnashing Jaws ac­
tion and the Rampage bonus action, while cult lead­
ers gain the Aura of Bloodthirst trait.
Gnashing Jaws. Melee Weapon Attack: bonus to hit equal to this
creature’s proficiency bonus plus its Strength modifier, reach
5 ft., one target. Hit: 1 d4 + this creature’s Strength modifier
piercing damage.
Rampage. When this creature reduces a creature to 0 hit points
with a melee attack on its turn, it can take a bonus action to
move up to half its speed and make one Gnashing Jaws attack.
Aura of Bloodthirst. If this creature isn’t incapacitated, any
creature that has Rampage can make its Gnashing Jaws attack
as a bonus action while within 10 feet of this creature.
Confusion. The target must succeed on a DC 17 Wisdom saving
throw or be affected by the confusion spell until the start of
Yeenoghu’s next turn.
Force. The target takes an extra 13 (2dl2) force damage.
Paralysis. The target must succeed on a DC 17 Constitution
saving throw or be paralyzed until the start of Yeenoghu’s
next turn.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target.
Hit: 20 (2dl0 + 9) acid damage.
Spellcasting. Yeenoghu casts one of the following spells, re­
quiring no material components and using Charisma as the
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 17):
At will: detect magic
3/day each: dispel magic, fear, invisibility
1/day: teleport
Bonus Actions
Rampage. When Yeenoghu reduces a creature to 0 hit points
with a melee attack, he moves up to half his speed and makes
one Bite attack.
Legendary Actions
Yeenoghu can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op­
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a
time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Yeenoghu
regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn.
Charge. Yeenoghu moves up to his speed.
Swat Away. Yeenoghu makes one Flail attack. If the attack hits,
the target must succeed on a DC 24 Strength saving throw or
be pushed up to 15 feet in a straight line away from Yeeno­
ghu. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the target is also
knocked prone.
Savage (Costs 2 Actions). Yeenoghu makes a separate Bite at­
tack against each creature within 10 feet of him.

=== PAGE 271 ===
Yeth Hound
Large Fey, Typically Neutral Evil
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 51 (6dl0+ 18)
Speed 40 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
18 (+4) 17 (+3) 16 (+3) 5 (-3) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Skills Perception +5
Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from
