Armor Class 15 (breastplate)
Hit Points 127 (17dl0 + 34)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
15 (+2) 12 (+1) 15 (+2) 21 (+5) 19 (+4) 21 (+5)
Saving Throws Int +9, Wis +8, Cha +9
Skills Arcana +9, Insight +8, Perception +8, Stealth +5
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18
Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon, telepathy 2 miles
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Creature Sense. The ulitharid is aware of the presence of crea­
tures within 2 miles of it that have an Intelligence score of 4 or
higher. It knows the distance and direction to each creature,
as well as each creature’s Intelligence score, but can’t sense
anything else about it. A creature protected by a mind blank
spell, a nondetection spell, or similar magic can’t be perceived
in this manner.
Magic Resistance. The ulitharid has advantage on saving
throws against spells and other magical effects.
Psionic Hub. If an elder brain establishes a psychic link with the
ulitharid, the elder brain can form a psychic link with any other
creature the ulitharid can detect using its Creature Sense. Any
such link ends if the creature falls outside the telepathy ranges
of both the ulitharid and the elder brain. The ulitharid can
maintain its psychic link with the elder brain regardless of the
distance between them, so long as they are both on the same
plane of existence. If the ulitharid is more than 5 miles away
from the elder brain, it can end the psychic link at any time (no
action required).
Actions
Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one
creature. Hit: 27 (4dl0 + 5) psychic damage. If the target is
Large or smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 14) and must suc­
ceed on a DC 17 Intelligence saving throw or be stunned until
this grapple ends.
Extract Brain. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
incapacitated Humanoid grappled by the ulitharid. Hit: 55
(lOdlO) piercing damage. If this damage reduces the target to
0 hit points, the ulitharid kills the target by extracting and de­
vouring its brain.
Mind Blast (Recharge 5-6). The ulitharid magically emits psy­
chic energy in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must
succeed on a DC 17 Intelligence saving throw or take 31 (4dl2
+ 5) psychic damage and be stunned for 1 minute. A target can
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending
the effect on itself on a success.
Spellcasting (Psionics). The ulitharid casts one of the following
spells, requiring no spell components and using Intelligence as
the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 17):
At will: detect thoughts, levitate
1 /day each: dominate monster, feeblemind, mass suggestion,
plane shift (self only), project image, scrying, telekinesis
i—...................................................
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 249

=== PAGE 250 ===
Vampiric Mist
In billowing clouds of fog lurk vampiric mists, the
wretched remnants of vampires that were prevented
from finding rest. Indistinguishable from the mists
they lurk within, they strike unseen and undetected
to bleed their victims dry.
Vampiric mists, sometimes called crimson mists,
are all that remain of vampires who couldn’t return
to their burial places after being defeated or suf­
fering some mishap. Denied the restorative power
of these places, the vampires’ bodies dissolve into
mist. The transformation strips the intelligence and
personality from them until only an unholy, insatia­
ble thirst for blood remains.
Indistinguishable from fog aside from the charnel
reek it exudes, a vampiric mist descends on a crea­
ture and causes the blood in the creature’s body
to ooze through its pores or spill out from its eyes,
nose, and mouth. This blood wafts out from the
victim like crimson smoke, which the mist then con­
sumes. The feeding causes no pain or discomfort to
the victim, so vampiric mists can feed on sleepers
without waking them. The more a mist feeds, the
redder it gets, such that it turns pink, then red, and
finally a deep scarlet hue; when sated, it rains blood
droplets wherever it goes.
Like sharks in water, vampiric mists can scent
blood from up to a mile away. Any injury, no matter
how small, might catch their attention and draw
them toward their victims. In battle, a mist focuses
its attacks on injured targets, since open wounds
are a more ready source of blood.
.............................................................................. • ..
Vampiric Mist
Medium Undead, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 13
Hit Points 30 (4d8 + 12)
Speed 0 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover)
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
6 (-2) 16 (+3) 16 (+3) 6 (-2) 12 (+1) 7 (-2)
Saving Throws Wis +3
Damage Resistances acid, cold, lightning, necrotic, thunder;
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, grappled,
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages —
Challenge 3 (700 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Life Sense. The mist can sense the location of any creature
within 60 feet of it, unless that creature’s type is Construct
or Undead.
............................... - -----------
250 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Forbiddance. The mist can’t enter a residence without an invi­
tation from one of the occupants.
Misty Form. The mist can occupy another creature’s space and
vice versa. In addition, if air can pass through a space, the mist
can pass through it without squeezing. Each foot of movement
in water costs it 2 extra feet, rather than 1 extra foot. The mist
can’t manipulate objects in any way that requires fingers or
manual dexterity.
Sunlight Hypersensitivity. The mist takes 10 radiant damage
whenever it starts its turn in sunlight. While in sunlight, the
mist has disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks.
Unusual Nature. The mist doesn’t require air or sleep.
Actions
Life Drain. The mist touches one creature in its space. The
target must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw
(Undead and Constructs automatically succeed), or it takes 10
(2d6 + 3) necrotic damage, the mist regains 10 hit points, and
the target’s hit point maximum is reduced by an amount equal
to the necrotic damage taken. This reduction lasts until the tar­
get finishes a long rest. The target dies if its hit point maximum
is reduced to 0.

=== PAGE 251 ===
Vargouille
Shrieking, flapping, and hid­
eous to behold—with a body
like a severed head and wings
in place of ears—vargouilles
boil out of the Abyss to infest other planes of exis­
tence, such as Carceri, where they are a menace.
Each vargouille carries a disease that creates more
of its kind; a flock of vargouilles on the wing is a
plague of chaos and evil.
Swarms of vargouilles flap through the caverns
and skies of the Abyss. They are given little regard
by powerful and intelligent demons since vargouilles
can do them no harm. Even the weakest demon,
such as a manes or a dretch, fears vargouilles only if
they appear in great numbers. In the Lower Planes,
vargouilles rarely get the chance to eat live prey
other than vermin. More often, they lap up the ichor
left behind when one Fiend kills another.
Because of their hunger for living prey, vargouilles
are eager to escape the Lower Planes. On rare oc­
casions, summoning a demon to another plane can
bring a vargouille along for the ride, attached like
a tick. The precautions a mortal takes to control a
summoned demon rarely account for a stowaway,
enabling the vargouille to escape into the world.
Vargouilles that roam free on the Material Plane
are a dire threat to all creatures. Their awful
shrieking can paralyze other creatures with fear,
which also makes the creatures susceptible to the
vargouille’s curse. If the curse is allowed to run its
course, an abyssal spirit invades the person’s body,
causing a gruesome transformation. Over a period
of hours, the victim’s head takes on fiendish aspects,
such as fangs, tentacles, and horns. At the same
time, the person’s ears grow larger, expanding into
wing-like appendages. In the final moments, the
victim’s head tears away from the body in a fountain
of blood, becoming another vargouille, which often
then eagerly laps up the blood spilling from its for­
mer body. Sunlight or the brilliant illumination of a
daylight spell can delay this transformation; other­
wise, only magic can overcome the curse.
--col--
Vargouille
Tiny Fiend, Typically Chaotic Evil
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 18 (4d4 + 8)
Speed 5 ft., fly 40 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
6 (-2) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 4 (-3) 7 (-2) 2 (-4)
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning
Damage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8
Languages understands Abyssal, Infernal, and any languages it
knew before becoming a vargouille but can’t speak
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) poison damage.
Abyssal Curse. The vargouille targets one incapacitated Hu­
manoid within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 12
Charisma saving throw or become cursed. The cursed target
loses 1 point of Charisma after each hour, as its head takes on
fiendish aspects. The curse doesn’t advance while the target is
in sunlight or the area of a daylight spell; don’t count that time.
When the cursed target's Charisma becomes 2, it dies, and its
head tears from its body and becomes a new vargouille. Cast­
ing remove curse, greater restoration, or a similar spell on the
target before the transformation is complete can end the curse.
Doing so undoes the changes made to the target by the curse.
Stunning Shriek (Recharge 5-6). The vargouille shrieks. Each
Humanoid and Beast within 30 feet of the vargouille and able
to hear it must succeed on a DC 12 Wisdom saving throw or
be frightened of the vargouille until the end of the vargouille’s
next turn. While frightened in this way, a target is stunned. If
a target’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it.
the target is immune to the Stunning Shriek of all vargouilles
for 1 hour.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY 251

=== PAGE 252 ===
Vegepygmies
Vegepygmies are fungus creatures that live in sim­
ple bands, hunting for sustenance and spreading the
spores by which they reproduce. Also called mold
folk or moldies, vegepygmies inhabit dark, moist ar­
eas, so they’re most commonly found underground
or in forests where little sunlight penetrates. A vege­
pygmy feels kinship with other plant and fungus
creatures, and thus vegepygmy bands coexist well
with creatures such as myconid adults, shriekers,
and violet fungi (all appear in the Monster Manual).
Although they prefer to eat fresh meat, bone, and
blood, vegepygmies can absorb nutrients from soil
and many sorts of organic matter, so they rarely
go hungry. A vegepygmy can hiss and make other
noises by forcing air through its mouth, but it can’t
speak in a conventional sense. Among themselves,
vegepygmies communicate by hissing, gestures, and
tapping. Vegepygmies build and craft little; any gear
they have is acquired from other creatures or built
by copying simple construction they have witnessed.
Vegepygmy
Typical vegepygmies originate from the remains
left behind when a Humanoid or a Giant is killed by
russet mold (see “Russet Mold” below). One or more
vegepygmies emerge from the corpse a day later.
Vegepygmy Chief
As a vegepygmy ages, it grows tougher and develops
spore clusters on its body. Other vegepygmies defer
to these so-called chiefs. A chief can expel its spores
in a burst, infecting nearby creatures. If a creature
dies while infected, its corpse produces vegepyg­
mies the same way russet mold does.
Thorny Vegepygmy
If a Beast such as a dog or a bear dies from russet
mold, the result is a bestial moldy called a thorny,
instead of a bipedal vegepygmy. Thornies are less in­
telligent than other vegepygmies, but they are larger
and more ferocious and have thorn-covered bodies.
Russet Mold
Few know for sure where russet mold came from.
One historical account tells of adventurers in a
mountain range discovering russet mold and vege­
pygmies in a peculiar metal dungeon full of strange
life. Another story says that explorers found russet
mold in a crater left by a falling star, with vegepyg­
mies infesting the forest nearby.
The mold is found only in places that are dark,
warm, and wet. Russet mold that spreads out across
a metal object can be mistaken for rust, and a suc­
cessful DC 15 Intelligence (Nature) or Wisdom (Sur­
vival) check is required to identify it.
CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
Effects of the Mold
Any creature that comes within 5 feet of russet mold
must make a DC 13 Constitution saving throw as
the mold emits a puff of spores. On a failed save, the
creature is poisoned. While poisoned in this way,
the creature takes 7 (2d6) poison damage at the
start of each of its turns. The creature can repeat
the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, end­
ing the effect on itself on a success. Any magic that
neutralizes poison or cures disease kills the infesta­
tion. A creature reduced to 0 hit points by the mold
dies. If the dead creature is a Beast, a Giant, or a
Humanoid, one or more vegepygmies emerge from
its body 24 hours later: one from a Small corpse,
two from a Medium corpse, four from a Large
corpse, eight from a Huge corpse, or sixteen from a
Gargantuan corpse.
Destroying the Mold
Russet mold can be hard to kill, since weapons and
most types of damage do it no harm. Effects that
deal acid, necrotic, or radiant damage kill 1 square
foot of russet mold per 1 damage dealt. A pound
of salt, a gallon of alcohol, or magic that cures dis­
ease kills russet mold in a square area that is 10
feet on a side. Sunlight kills any russet mold in the
light’s area.
Vegepygmy
Small Plant, Typically Neutral
Armor Class 13 (natural armor)
Hit Points 13 (3d6 + 3)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
7 (-2) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 6 (-2) 11 (+0) 7 (-2)
Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4
Damage Resistances lightning, piercing
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12
Languages Vegepygmy
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Plant Camouflage. The vegepygmy has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks it makes in any terrain with ample obscuring
vegetation.
Regeneration. The vegepygmy regains 3 hit points at the start
of its turn. If it takes cold, fire, or necrotic damage, this trait
doesn’t function at the start of the vegepygmy’s next turn. The
vegepygmy dies only if it starts its turn with 0 hit points and
doesn’t regenerate.
Actions
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) slashing damage.
Sling. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one
target. Hit: 4 (1 d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage.

=== PAGE 253 ===
Vegepygmy Chief
Small Plant, Typically Neutral
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 33 (6d6 + 12)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
14 (+2) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 7 (-2) 12 (+1) 9 (-1)
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Damage Resistances lightning, piercing
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13
Languages Vegepygmy
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Plant Camouflage. The vegepygmy has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks it makes in any terrain with ample obscuring
vegetation.
Regeneration. The vegepygmy regains 5 hit points at the start
of its turn. If it takes cold, fire, or necrotic damage, this trait
doesn’t function at the start of the vegepygmy’s next turn. The
vegepygmy dies only if it starts its turn with 0 hit points and
doesn’t regenerate.
Actions
Multiattack. The vegepygmy makes two Claw attacks or two
melee Spear attacks.
TIHW
DRAHCIR
.NOSLEN
MIJ
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) slashing damage.
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1 d6 + 2) piercing damage, or
6 (1 d8 + 2) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a
melee attack.
Spores (1/Day). A 15-foot-radius cloud of toxic spores extends
out from the vegepygmy. The spores spread around corners.
Each creature in that area that isn’t a Plant must succeed on
a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned. While poi­
soned in this way, a target takes 9 (2d8) poison damage at the
start of each of its turns. A target can repeat the saving throw
at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on
a success.
--col--
Thorny Vegepygmy
Medium Plant, Typically Neutral
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
13 (+1) 12 (+1) 13 (+1) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) 6 (-2)
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +3
Damage Resistances lightning, piercing
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14
Languages —
Challenge 1 (200 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Plant Camouflage. The thorny has advantage on Dexterity
(Stealth) checks it makes in any terrain with ample obscuring
vegetation.
Regeneration. The thorny regains 5 hit points at the start of its
turn. If it takes cold, fire, or necrotic damage, this trait doesn’t
function at the start of the thorny’s next turn. The thorny dies
only if it starts its turn with 0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate.
Thorny Body. At the start of its turn, the thorny deals 2 (1 d4)
piercing damage to any creature grappling it.
Actions
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d8 + 1) piercing damage.
CHAPTER 2 BESTIARY 253

=== PAGE 254 ===
War Priest
Medium Humanoid (Cleric), Any Alignment
Armor Class 18 (plate)
Hit Points 117 (18d8 + 36)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
16 (+3) 10 (+0) 14 (+2) 11 (+0) 17 (+3) 13 (+1)
Saving Throws Con +6, Wis +7
Skills Intimidation +5, Religion +4
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages any two languages
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) Proficiency Bonus +4
Actions
Multiattack. The war priest makes two Maul attacks, and it
uses Holy Fire.
Maul. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 10 (3d6) radi­
ant damage.
Holy Fire. The war priest targets one creature it can see within
60 feet of it. The target must make a DC 15 Wisdom saving
throw. On a failed save, the target takes 12 (2d8 + 3) radiant
damage, and it is blinded until the start of the war priest’s next
turn. On a successful save, the target takes half as much dam­
age and isn’t blinded.
Spellcasting. The war priest casts one of the following spells,
using Wisdom as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 15):
At will: light, spare the dying, thaumaturgy
1/day each: banishment, command, dispel magic,fame strike,
guardian of faith, hold person, lesser restoration, revivify
Bonus Actions
Healing Light (Recharge 4-6). The war priest or one creature of
its choice within 60 feet of it regains 12 (2d8 + 3) hit points.
254 CHAPTER 2 | BESTIARY
--col--
War Priest
War priests worship deities of war, protection, and
strategy. They plan tactics, lead soldiers into battle,
confront enemy spellcasters, and tend to casualties.
A war priest might command an army or serve as
the right hand of a warlord (appears in this book) on
the battlefield.
War priests typically adorn themselves with a
symbol of their faith. You can roll on the War Priest
Holy Symbols table below, or choose one that fits
your campaign.
War Priest Holy Symbols
d8 Holy Symbol
1 Vial of iridescent liquid
2 Hilt of a broken sword
3 Piece of stained glass from a shrine
4 Clay figurine of a ki-rin or another Celestial
5 Torch carved so that a hand appears to be holding
the flame
6 Circlet of woven reeds
7 Scrimshawed bone
8 Vessel such as a cup, a jug, an urn, or an amphora

=== PAGE 255 ===
Warlocks
Warlocks gain arcane might through magical pacts
with mysterious entities. While some use their abil­
ities to serve the sources of their power, others use
them to undermine or even destroy these entities.
Warlock of the Archfey
Warlocks of the Archfey gain their powers through
magical pacts forged with lords of the Feywild.
These warlocks commonly associate with lesser Fey
creatures such as boggles, quicklings, and redcaps
(all appear in this book) or even satyrs and sprites
(both appear in the Monster Manual).
i- ■— 1 . - • ........... - - —. . -...........-
Warlock of the Archfey
Medium Humanoid, Any Alignment
Armor Class 13 (16 with mage armor)
Hit Points 67 (15d8)
Speed 30 ft.
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA
9(-l) 16 (+3) 11 (+0) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 18 (+4)
Saving Throws Wis +3, Cha +6
Skills Arcana +2, Deception +6, Nature +2, Persuasion +6
Condition Immunities charmed
Senses passive Perception 11
Languages any two languages (usually Sylvan)
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Proficiency Bonus +2
Actions
Multiattack. The warlock makes two Rapier attacks, or it uses
Bewildering Word twice.
Rapier. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (1 d8 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) force damage.
Bewildering Word. The warlock utters a magical bewilderment,
targeting one creature it can see within 60 feet of it. The target
must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or take 9 (2d8)
psychic damage and have disadvantage on attack rolls until the
end of the warlock’s next turn.
Spellcasting. The warlock casts one of the following spells, us­
ing Charisma as the spellcasting ability (spell save DC 14):
At will: dancing lights, disguise self, mage armor (self only), mage
hand, minor illusion, prestidigitation, speak with animals
1/day each: charm person, dimension door, hold monster
Reactions
Misty Escape (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). In re­
sponse to taking damage, the warlock turns invisible and tele­
ports, along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to
60 feet to an unoccupied space it can see. It remains invisible
until the start of its next turn or until it attacks, makes a dam­
age roll, or casts a spell.
--col--
